+ +
+ +
Haitian Creole – English
Dictionary
with
Basic English – Haitian Creole Appendix
Jean Targète
and
Raphael G. Urciolo
+ +
+ +
Haitian Creole – English
Dictionary
with
Basic English – Haitian Creole Appendix
Jean Targète
and
Raphael G. Urciolo
dp Dunwoody Press
Kensington, Maryland, U.S.A.
+ +
+ +
Haitian Creole – English Dictionary
Copyright ©1993 by Jean Targète and Raphael G. Urciolo
All rights reserved.
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the Authors.
All inquiries should be directed to:
Dunwoody Press, P.O. Box 400, Kensington, MD, 20895 U.S.A.
ISBN: 0-931745-75-6
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 93-71725
Compiled, edited, printed and bound in the United States of America
Second Printing
i
Introduction
A variety of glossaries of Haitian Creole have been published either as
appendices to descriptions of Haitian Creole or as booklets. As far as fullfledged
Haitian Creole-English dictionaries are concerned, only one has been
published and it is now more than ten years old. It is the compilers’ hope that
this new dictionary will go a long way toward filling the vacuum existing in
modern Creole lexicography.
Innovations
The following new features have been incorporated in this Haitian CreoleEnglish
dictionary.
1. The definite article that usually accompanies a noun is indicated. We urge
the user to take note of the definite article singular ( a, la, an or lan ) which
is shown for each noun. Lan has one variant: nan.
2. Most English words that are of the same origin as Creole words are
marked with an asterisk (*). This feature will help users to recognize more
easily Creole words that are identical or close to their English counterparts.
3. An English translation is supplied for the numerous Creole sentences that
serve as examples. In addition to the regular examples, selected literary
illustrations are provided. These are sentences taken from eighteen selected
works of Creole literature (novels, plays, poetry, religious writings, etc.).
The following is a list of the reference codes assigned to these works in this
dictionary, followed by the names of the authors, the titles in italics, and the
year of publication:
BEAUBRUN/A.................................Beaubrun, Théodore, Anna (1962)
BEAUBRUN/L.................................Beaubrun, Théodore, La Haine au Service de l’Amour
(1963)
CELESTIN-MEGIE/1.................Célestin-Mégie, Emile, Lanmou pa gin Baryè, part I
(1984, Second Edition)
CELESTIN-MEGIE/2.................Célestin-Mégie, Emile, Lanmou pa gin Baryè, part II
(1977)
CELESTIN-MEGIE/3.................Célestin-Mégie, Emile, Lanmou pa gin Baryè, part
III (1981)
ii
DEJEAN..................................................Déjean, Yves & Paul, Evangile Dimanche ac Fêtt
(1962)
FARDIN...................................................Fardin, Dieudonné, Sept Fleurs Soleil (1963)
FRANKETIENNE/B...................Franketienne, Bobomasouri (1984)
FRANKETIENNE/D...................Franketienne, Dézafi (1975)
FRANKETIENNE/P....................Franketienne, Pèlin-Tèt (1978)
FRANKETIENNE/T....................Franketienne, Troufoban (1978)
MORISSEAU-LEROY/A........Morisseau-Leroy, Félix, Antigone (1953)
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D........Morisseau-Leroy, Félix, Diacoute (1953)
ONEC/N...................................................Onec, N’ap Li (1964)
PARISOT................................................Parisot, Rév. J., L’Evangile chaque Dimanche (1960)
PAURIS....................................................Jean-Baptiste, Pauris, Nan Lonbray Inosans (1985)
PRESSOIR............................................Pressoir, Charles Fernand, Sèt Poèm ki sòt nan Mòn
(1954)
SYLVAIN...............................................Sylvain, Georges, Cric? Crac? (1901)
Alphabetical Order
The alphabetical order for the Haitian Creole and the arrangement of the
dictionary is:
A B Ch D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U V W Y Z
Headwords and Variants
Because the process of standardization of Haitian Creole is not complete,
many headwords have several variants, and often the compilers have had to
decide which ones to choose.
Superscript numbers ( 1 2 3 ) placed next to certain successive headwords
indicate that they are homonyms or simply the same word in different
contexts or grammatical roles.
Parts of speech
iii
Abbreviations used to indicate the parts of speech will be found in the list of
abbreviations which immediately precedes the entries of the letter “A”. Only
two observations are necessary.
a) French and Creole dictionaries designate some verbs as pronominal verbs
(abbreviation: vpr). The user of this dictionary should remember that vpr
stands for vèb pronominal (pronominal verb).
b) Creole uses as descriptive adjectives many of the French descriptive
adjectives and has created others which are easily identifiable. But in Creole
a great number of other words or groups of words are treated as descriptive
adjectives by commonly being used with an attributive function. In the
present state of research, one cannot always tell with absolute certainty those
Creole words used as attributives, which are purely descriptive adjectives,
and those which are not. For instance, Félix Morisseau-Leroy wrote in his
play Antigone, Gan chèf ki chèf pase chèf (There are chiefs who are more
chief than other chiefs). Evidently, while the word chèf in the middle is
attributive, it is not a descriptive adjective but a noun. However, not all cases
are as clear-cut as this one. More research on Creole’s descriptive adjectives
is necessary. In the meantime, we borrow from a predecessor the designation
attrib for both descriptive adjectives and closely related words used as
attributives.
Single and compound words
While single words will be easy to find in any Creole dictionary, it is a
different matter when it comes to compound words. The difficulty lies with
the fact that some concepts which are expressed in French by compound words
(arc-en-ciel = rainbow) or by groups of words (mal de tête = headache)
become a single word in Creole (lakansyèl, maltèt). There is a general
tendency for writers to put together as one word in Creole all of these groups
of French words that form one single concept or one tightly connected
expression, but the process is still on-going. What one author writes as one
word, another still considers as two. Sometimes the same author connects or
disconnects the parts of a compound word or of an expression according to the
inspiration of the moment. For instance, the great innovator Franketienne
wrote the following sentences. In his play, Pèlin-Tèt: Ou konn gou dyòl ou.
Ou pa tap janm ale lan you estasyon soulèzèl. In his novel, Dézafi: Sou
lèzèl, nou ravitaye lan pousyè nan labou anba solèy anba lapli. In the
play, he wrote soulèzèl as one word; in the novel, as two. Until Creole
becomes fully standardized, each lexicographer will have to make choices.
Other Features
iv
a) In the cases when we use the (‘) sign between single letter personal
pronouns and the following or preceding word (e.g., M’a wè’l = I’ll see him),
other authors use a hyphen (-) or no sign at all.
b) We have used the Creole spelling Vodou in the English definitions in
place of the English word voodoo, because we are referring to the Vodou
religion and not the hocus pocus of magic and witchcraft attached to the
English word voodoo.
c) The standard form of Haitian Creole is the one spoken in Port-au-Prince,
the capital. A few colloquial words from other areas (the North, the city of
Jérémie in the South) have been added.
We gratefully acknowledge the help we received from Emile Célestin-Mégie, Rev.
Roger Désir, Mrs. Jacqueline Julien Targète, and many others.
Any corrections or suggestions will be taken into account and gratefully
acknowledged in a future edition.
Bibliography
Bentolila, Alain, et al. Ti Diksyonnè Kreyòl-Franse. Port-au-Prince: Editions
Caraïbes, 1976. 511 pp.
Chaudenson, Robert. Le Lexique du Parler créole de la Réunion. 2 vols. Paris:
Librairie Honoré Champion, 1974. 1249 pp.
Church of God (Mennonite). Creole-English Dictionary: A Basic Vocabulary.
Port-au-Prince: 1971. 56 pp.
Courlander, Harold The Drum and the Hoe: Life and Lore of the Haitian People.
Berkeley: California University Press, 1960. [Contains a glossary of
Creole terms, pp. 357-61.]
Département de l’Agriculture d’Haïti. Identification des Plantes d’Haïti par
leurs noms créoles. 1930. 23 pp.
Faine, Jules. Dictionnaire français-créole. Ottawa: Les Editions Leméac Inc.,
1974. 487 pp.
Faine, Jules. Philologie Créole. Second edition. 1937. 320 pp. [Contains a
glossary of Creole terms.]
FAYO (See Urciolo, Raphael G.)
v
Fombrun, Odette Roy. Comment transformer le Vocabulaire fondamental
Créole-Français en Vocabulaire français. 54 pp.
Gilabert, P. Georges Coll. Diccionario Kréyòl-Español, Español-Kréyòl. Santo
Domingo: Intituto nacional de pastoral, 1979. 67 pp.
Howe, Kate. Haitian Creole Newspaper Reader. Wheaton, Md: Dunwoody
Press, 1990. 210 pp. [Contains a glossary of Creole terms.]
Jeanty, Edner A. Diksyonè Kréyòl. Port-au-Prince: La Presse Evangélique,
1985. 110 pp.
Hall, Robert A. Haitian Creole. Menasha, Wisconsin: The American
Anthropological Association, 1953. [Contains a glossary of Creole terms
pp. 223-309.]
McConnell and Swan You Can Learn Creole. Petit Goave: Imprimerie du
Sauveur, 1960. [Contains a vocabulary, pp. 41-98.]
Moral, Paul. Le Paysan Haïtien. Paris: Maisonneuve et Larose, 1978.
[Contains a glossary of Creole terms, pp. 349-355.]
Nelson, Roger. Zouazo Ayiti-yo. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Deschamps,
1979. 103 pp.
Peleman, Louis. Diksyonnè Kréyòl-Fransé. Port-au-Prince: Editions Bon
Nouvèl, 1978. 209 pp.
Pierre-Noël, Arsène V. Nomenclature Polyglotte des Plantes Haïtiennes et
Tropicales. Port-au-Prince: Presses Nationales d’Haïti, 1971. 588 pp.
Pompilus, Pradel. Contribution à l’étude comparée du créole et du français.
Port-au-Prince: Editions Caraïbes. Tome I: 132 pp. (1973) Tome II: 192
pp. (1976).
Raymond, Roc J. Petit Guide Pratique. Port-au-Prince: Presses Nationales
d’Haïti, 1966. 312 pp. [Remarks on French and Creole vocabularies.]
Rotary Club You Can Learn Creole. Rotary Club of Haines City, Florida,
1977. 58 pp. [A glossary.]
Targète, Jean. Advanced Grammar of Haitian Creole. Washington, DC:
1972. 226 pp.
Urciolo, Raphael G. 3333 Proverbs in Haitian Creole. Port-au-Prince: Editions
Fardin, 428 pp. (Pseudonym: FAYO).
vi
Valdman, Albert. Haitian Creole - English Dictionary. Bloomington: Indiana
University, Creole Institute, 1981. 582 pp.
vii
Abbreviations
adj adjective
adv adverb
anat anatomy
antiq antiquated
attrib attributive
aux v auxiliary verb
cf compare
conj conjunction
culin culinary
def art definite article
demons adj demonstrative adjective
demons pron demonstrative pronoun
E. English
esp especially
euph euphemism
fam familiar
fem feminine
fig figurative
Fr. French
gen generally
geog geography
indef adj indefinite adjective
indef art indefinite article
indef pron indefinite pronoun
interj interjection
interrog adj interrogative adjective
interrog pro interrogative pronoun
It. Italian
Lat. Latin
lit literally
m masculine
milit military
Neap. Neapolitan
n noun
num numeral
onom onomatopoeia
pej pejorative
pers pron personal pronoun
phr phrase
plur plural
poss adj possessive adjective
poss pron possessive pronoun
prep preposition
rel pron relative pronoun
sing singular
s.o. someone
Sp. Spanish
syn synonym
tech technical
usu usually
V see
v verb
v marker verb marker
vi intransitive verb
vpr pronominal verb
vt transitive verb
1 A
A
a 1
v marker Sign of the future tense. Use of this
form or its variants ava, av, va, v is flexible in
accordance with phonetic context. PRESSOIR-26:
Ou a kouri tout tan You will run forever.
a 2
def art Postpositive determiner used after
words ending in a non nasal vowel sound. V la,
nan, an. MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-7: Gan yon gro
devenn ki tonbe sou tout peyi a There is a terrible
misfortune that fell on the entire country.
a 3
prep To, at, on. PRESSOIR-11: A midi, lò
solèy te cho At noon, when the sun was hot.
a 4
prep Of (used mostly in the North to show
possession). Liv a Toma Tom’s book.
a 5
prep ’s. A òm Men’s. Rad a òm Men’s
clothing.
a 6
conj And, with. V ak, avèk. Pen a bè Bread
and butter
a 7
interj Ah! Oh!
aba interj Down with...!
abajou a n Lampshade.
abako a n Jeans, blue-jeans. Pants made from
blue denim. HABACO company, manufacturers.
abandonnen, bandonnen vt To give up, to forsake,
to abandon*.
abat vt To kill, to knock down. Yo abat li kon
chen They killed him like a dog.
abatwa a, labatwa a n Slaughter-house, abattoir*.
abc, abese n 1. The alphabet. 2. First elements
of a science or an art.
abi a 1
n Abuse*, injustice. Fè abi To abuse, to
take advantage of.
abi a 2
n Formal attire, official costume.
abil attrib Skillful.
abim nan, labim nan n Misfortune, misery, bottomless
hole, abyss*.
abiman an n Clothing (formal).
abit la n Umpire, referee; arbiter*.
abitan an n 1. Peasant, country folks, farmer.
2. Hick, uncouth person. (syn) grosoulye. Abitan
dekore Pretentious hick.
abitasyon an, labitasyon an, bitasyon an n 1. Plantation,
farm, habitation*. Rural farmhouse
(dwelling) during colonial times including land
around it. 2. Hamlet, courtyard with several
‘kay’ around it. Isit la se abitasyon papa’m, sa lòt
bò a pou tonton’m Here is my father’s house; over
on the other side is my uncle’s home.
abite vt To inhabit*. vi To live, to stay.
abitid la, labitid la n Habit*, custom.
abitue, abitwe, abitye vt To get s.o. accustomed
(ak to). vi To get accustomed with, to be in
the habit of, to be used to.
abiye, biye vt To clothe, to dress. M’pito biye ou
pase m’nouri ou I’d rather clothe you than feed you
(said to someone who loves to eat). vi To get
dressed. M’pral abiye I’m going to get dressed.
Pa antre, m’pa abiye Don’t come in, I am not
decent.
abizan attrib Abusive* (person).
abize vt To abuse*, to take advantage of (exces-
sively).
ablabla V blabla
abò adv Aboard*, on board*; in or on a boat.
Monte abò To go aboard, on board.
abobo, ayibobo interj Exclamation used in Vodou
ceremonies to express joy. Hallelujah! Amen!
abòde, bòde vt To come near, to approach.
abòdjò, bòdyò n Stupid, a stupid person.
aboli vt To suppress, to abolish*.
abondans la, labondans la, bondans la n Abundance*.
Li lan abondans He is wealthy. An
abondans Aplenty.
abònen, abòne vi To subscribe (ak to) (a
newspaper, a magazine, etc.). Also used for any
goods, merchandise, etc. Mwen abòne ak machann
lèt la depi twazan The milkman has been delivering
milk to me for three years.
abònman an n Subscription. It is used not only
for newspapers but also for goods and merchandise
that are delivered at regular intervals.
abonotcho, abonocho, abwenotcho interj Damn
you! I renounce you, satan! FRANKETIENNE/P-33:
Yo voye ou. Abonotcho! PAURIS-36:
Li bat abonotcho dèyè rèv galipòt.
abou 1
attrib At the very end, at my wit’s end. At
the end of one’s patience. Mari’m tap fè’m soufri
tròp, lè m’te abou, m’divòse avè’l My husband was
making me suffer too much; when I couldn’t take it
any more, I divorced him.
abou 2
Pale an abou To speak in parables.
aboupòtan adv At close range, point-blank. Tire
yon moun aboupòtan To shoot s.o. point-blank.
abouti, bouti vi 1. To result in. Malgre tout efò’l,
li pa abouti a anyen In spite of all his efforts, he
didn’t get anywhere. 2. To succeed, to end (to
ripen). Abse a abouti The boil is ready to pop.
3. To arrive at a destination.
abreje vt To help, to be of assistance (to s.o.).
A 2
abrejman an n Help, assistance. PAURIS-13:
Latè mande kanpo. Latè ap bouske abrejman.
abri a n Shelter.
abriko V zabriko
absan, apsan attrib 1. Absent*, away. 2. Absent-
minded.
abse a, apse a n Abscess*. Mete klou sou abse To
add insult to injury, to make matters worse.
absent la, labsent la, lapsent la n 1. Absinthe*.
Artemisia absinthium L. 2. Type of beverage.
absoliman, apsoliman adv Absolutely*.
absteni vpr To abstain*.
abwa a n Tip, pourboire*.
acha a n Buy, purchase. M’ap fè acha I’m
shopping.
achevèk la n Archbishop*.
achitèk la n Architect*.
achitekti a n Architecture*.
achiv la n Archives*.
achtafè a, achte afè a n One who gets involved
in everything, even when it doesn’t concern him
at all.
achte vt To buy. Achte trò chè To overpay. Achte
bon mache To buy cheap. Achte figi, achte dèyè To
flatter. Achte chat nan makout (or) nan sak To
buy a pig in a poke.
achtè a n Buyer. Achtèdfigi Flatterer.
adapte vt To adapt*.
adefo, a defo prep In the absence of.
adezif la n Adhesive* tape.
adibitòm V adlibitòm
adiltè a n Adultery*.
adipopo V adjipopo
adisyon an n Addition*.
adisyonnen vt To add.
adjahountò a, adjountò a n Largest of the drums
of the rada rite.
adjewidan V adyewidan
adjipopo a, adipopo a, azipopo a, djipopo a n
Misfortune, magical trap, evil ways, something
that forces you to lie and wait, something that
you cannot get rid of. A problem without a
solution.
adjo V adyo
adjwen an n Assistant, aid.
adlibitòm, adibitòm adv Lat. In great quantity,
as much as you wish, to your heart’s content.
admèt vt To admit*, to acknowledge, to concede,
to tolerate.
admeton (ke) Let’s assume (that), let’s suppose
(that).
administratè a n Administrator*.
administre vt To administer*, to manage, to
govern.
admirasyon an n Admiration*.
admire vt To admire*.
adokte V adopte
adonnen vpr To become addicted (a: to); to
give one’s self over completely (a: to). Li adonnen’l
sèlman a kouti All she does is sew.
adopte, adokte vt To adopt*.
adorasyon an n Adoration* (in Christian church-
es).
adore vt To worship, to adore*.
adousi V dousi
adrès la 1
n Address (of a house).
adrès 2
V ladrès
adrese vt 1. To address*. M’adrese’l laparòl I
spoke to him, I addressed him. 2. To turn (a: to).
Si m’gen yon problèm, m’pap adrese’l If I have a
problem, I will not turn to him.
advantis la n Adventist*.
adwat adv To the right, right. Adwat agòch In
all directions.
adwatman adv With tact.
adwaz la n Slate. Kreyon adwaz Slate pencil.
adye 1
interj Alas! My lord! For heaven’s sake!
Adye bondye! Good gracious! What a pity! Adye
manman! Adye frè! (Expressive interjection) Gee
whiz! That’s too bad!
adye, adje 2
interj Fairwell, adieu*. Greetings! In
the villages, this word used to have (maybe still
has) the general meaning of: Greetings!
adyewidan, adjewidan interj What a shame! Oh
God!
adyo, adjo interj Fairwell!
adyovat, adjovat, adyova interj It’s finished. That’s
the end of it. Good bye. PAURIS-89: Depi janmpis
rouke pou ou, adjovat, ou bannann lontan.
afè a, zafè a n 1. Business, matter, affair*. Bon
afè Bargain. Yon pakèt afè A big deal, an important
matter. Afè’m pa bon I’m broke. Fè tout yon afè ak
To make a big fuss about. 2. Baggage, belongings.
3. Genitals.
afeksyon an n Affection*. Nonk pitit la gen anpil
afeksyon pou li The child’s uncle has a great deal
of affection for him.
3 A
afèmaj la, afèmay la n Renting, leasing, letting
by contract a house, a farm.
afese attrib Depressed, down.
afiba a n 1. Local food consisting of meat, (usu)
small strips of pork. 2. Worthless person or
thing.
afich la n Poster.
afiche vt 1. To post, to hang (up) in a public
place. 2. To make a show of. L’ap afiche richès
li He is showing off his wealth. 3. To speak evil
of, to defame. 4. Afiche avèk To appear in public
with. Li afiche (afiche’l) ak fi a He appears in
public with the girl; he exposes his relations with the
girl.
afliksyon V lafliksyon
afòs conj Because of, as a result of (by overdoing),
by dint of.
afre attrib Ravenous, gluttonous; more specifically
one who devours (eats, grabs) large amounts of
food. V aloufa, gouman, saf, voras.
afreman an n Gluttony.
Afrik, Lafrik n Africa*. Lafrik Ginen West Africa.
Kwayans Lafrik African beliefs.
afro a n 1. Popular dance. 2. Hairstyle.
afron an n Affront*, offense. Li fè’m afron He
offended me.
afyo a, apio a n Net-grass, coco-grass. Cyperus
rotundus L. A potato-like vegetable. It is placed
on the skin to help heal burns.
aganman an, agranman an n Chameleon.
agante vt To seduce, to charm, to attract.
agasan attrib Irritating, annoying.
agase vt To needle; to incite, to get on s.o.’s
nerves, to tease, to irritate.
agida a n Drumstick.
agiman an n Contention, argument*, thesis.
PAURIS-124: Li pral pouse yon agiman.
ago interj Exclamation denoting joy, consent,
approval.
agòch, agoch adv 1. To the left, on the left.
2. (attrib) Awkward, clumsy.
agogo adv Plentiful.
agoni 1
vi To be in the agonies* of death.
agoni an, agonni an 2
n Agony*. Malad la an
agoni, li san lè mouri The sick person is in the
death agony. He could die any minute.
agonyon an n Old bachelor or spinster.
agraf la n Hook, clamp, fastener, agraffe* (for
garments).
agrandi vt To enlarge, to widen.
agrandisman an n Enlargement.
agranlijyèn, a gran lijyèn, agrandlijèn adv In
large quantity, in abundance.
agranman V aganman
agrave, angrave vt To make worse, to aggravate*.
Sa’l fè la a agrave sitiyasyon an What he just did
made things worse. vi To become more serious.
agresif attrib Agressive.
agreyab attrib Agreeable*, nice, lovely, pleasing,
pleasant.
agreye vt To polish, to adjust, to shape (wood).
agrikiltè a n Farmer.
agrikilti a, lagrikilti a n Farming, agriculture.
agrikòl attrib Agricultural*.
agronòm nan, agwonnòm nan n Agronomist*,
agriculturalist.
agwe n Vodou deity.
ah interj Exclamation denoting admiration, approval,
surprise, etc.
aha V anhan
ajan an 1
n Agent.
ajan an 2
n Silver. V lajan. Rwa Kristòf tiye tèt li
ak yon bal an ajan King Christopher killed himself
with a silver bullet. Kiyè a an ajan The spoon is
made of silver.
ajans la n Agency*.
ajenou, a jenou adv Kneeling.
aji vi To act. Agi ak To treat, to handle. Li byen
aji He acted well. Li mal aji ak mwen He didn’t
act right (properly) with me. Aji sou To affect. Sa
aji sou li plis pase li te panse That afffected him
more than he thought.
ajil attrib Agile*.
ajisman an n Act, action, behavior, deed.
ajiste vt To adjust*, to fit.
ajitasyon an n Excitement, agitation*.
ajite attrib Restless.
ajou, a jou attrib 1. Up to date. 2. Ready. M’poko
ajou ak kouti a I am not finished with the sewing
(or) The sewing is not ready.
ajoupa a, joupa a n A country hut. A straw hut
used since colonial days and made simply with
some poles and palm or coconut leaves. (usu)
They consist of one room only.
ajoute vt To add (on).
ak 1
prep 1. With, and. V avèk. Vini ak mwen
Come with me. FARDIN-13: Nwèl la va kòmanse
sanble ak yon bagay ki fèt pou tout moun Christmas
A 4
will start looking like something made for everybody.
2. Of, from, out. Li fèt ak farin It is made from
flour.
ak la, akt la 2
n Act*, Action*, activity*.
ak la, akt la, zak la 3
n Certificate, deed, legal
document, act*. Pase ak sivil To issue a marriage
certificate after a civil ceremony (wedding) as
opposed to a religious wedding.
ak tout 1
prep Inspite of; with all. Ak tout okipasyon’l,
li gen tan pou etidye. In spite of all he has to do, he
has time to study.
ak tout, atout 2
conj Although, even though. Ak
tout li malad, l’al travay jodi a Even though (although)
he is sick, he went to work today.
akable vt To blame.
akadejak V kadejak
akajou V kajou
akalmi V kalmi
akapare vt To grab, to take possession of.
akaryat attrib Grouchy, grumpy, fussy. Kou yo
koumanse antre nan granmoun, yo vin akaryat As
soon as they get old, they get grouchy.
akasan an n A very thick beverage made with
ground corn (and sometimes milk).
akasya a n Acacia* tree. Acacia lutea Mill.
Akayè, Lakayè n Arcahaie, a town near Port-auPrince,
where the Haitian flag was created.
ake conj With. It is used in the Northern part of
Haiti.
akèy la n Reception, welcome. Yon bon akèy A
fine reception. Move akèy Bad (unwelcome) reception.
akeyi vt To receive. Byen akeyi To welcome. Mal
akeyi To give a bad reception to. V resevwa.
aki a n A plant (Blighia sapida). Edible vegetable.
Must be cooked.
akizasyon an n Accusation*.
akizatè a n Accuser*.
akize 1
vt To accuse*.
akize a 2
n Defendant.
aklè, a klè adv Openly.
akò a n Agreement, accord*. Fè akò ak To
contract with. M’pa fè akò ak vagabon I don’t deal
with bums.
akòday V kòkòday
akòde vt 1. To grant, to accord*. 2. To tune
(mus).
akòdeyon an n Accordion*.
akokiye, rakokiye vi To curl up, to cringe from
fear or shyness, to cuddle up, to crouch (persons
only).
akòkò, akwòkò n Troublesome, bothersome,
incurable thing (you can’t get rid of it).
akoma a, koma a n Acoma*. One of the grandest
trees in the forests of the Antilles: Turiault.
Syderoxylon foetidissimus Jacq.
akondisyon, a kondisyon conj On condition*
that.
akonpanye, akonpanyen vt To accompany*, to
escort.
akonpli vt To accomplish*.
akoste vt 1. To approach (s.o.). 2. To come
along the side of. Batiman an akoste waf la The
ship came along the side of the dock.
akote, a kote prep 1. Beside, alongside. PRESSOIR-
22: Akote machann kasav la Beside the cassava
vendor. 2. In comparison with.
akouche vi To give birth; to deliver a child.
akouchèz la n Midwife.
akouchman an n Childbirth, labor, delivery.
akoukouman, koukouman attrib Crouch(ed).
akoupi, koupi vi To crouch down (squat) on
one’s feet.
akòz prep Because of, owing to. Akòz sa’l te di’m
nan Because of what he had told me.
akra a n Malanga, pealed and grated, spices and
other ingredients, boiled in grease and served in
small pieces, the size of dumplings.
akrèk attrib Avaricious, greedy. Said of one who
wants to grab everything for himself, who goes
after everything. Li akrèk pou fanm He is always
going after women. Ou trò akrèk pou lajan You
always grab for money.
akrekre a n 1. Insignificant person. 2. Loose
woman.
akro a n Rip, tear. Pran akro To be ripped.
akrobat la n Acrobat*.
akrochay la n Conflict, argument, fight.
aks la n Axle* (of a car, etc.).
akseleratè a n Accelerator*.
akselere vi To speed up, to accelerate* (vehicles).
akseptab attrib Satisfactory, acceptable*.
aksepte, asepte vt To accept*, to admit; to tolerate.
aksidan an n Accident*. Fè aksidan To crash; to
have an accident.
5 A
aksyon an n 1. Action*, deed, act. 2. Unexpected
event or fact arousing surprise and anger; audacity.
Nan pwen moun ki gen aksyon kon sa No one
is more daring than he.
aksyondegras la n Thanksgiving.
aksyonè a, aksyonnè n One who commits irresponsible
acts; a bad character. Msye se aksyonè,
mwen pa nan paròl anpil ak li The man is too bold;
I don’t have much to say to him.
akt V ak
aktè a n Actor*.
aktif attrib Active*.
aktim kaporal n Military grade close to that of a
corporal. Cf. E acting* corporal*.
aktivite a n Activity*. Li gen anpil aktivite sou li
He is quite active.
aktris la n Actress*.
akwabon, a kwa bon What’s the use!
akwe vt 1. To string animals together. To tie an
animal close to a pole in preparation for slaughter.
2. To mistreat s.o. harshly.
akwentans la n Suspicious, equivocal relationship.
akwòkò V akòkò
al vi Contracted form of ale, used pretonically
and not at the end of a sentence. It must always
be followed by some other word. Al lekòl Go to
school. Al fè afè ou Go finish your work; go away;
go do your thing. Al bannann To be finished; to be
over with; to end badly; to fail.
ala 1
interj Type of exclamatory adverb. What...,
What a... How... Ala bèl ròb! What a pretty
dress! Ala ou okipe! You’re really busy! Ala traka
pou mwen... What I am going through to...
ala 2
conj Yet, however. Ou kwè l’ap ba ou’l; ala
m’konnen li pap ba ou’l You think he’s going to
give it to you; yet, I know that he won’t.
alabri attrib Safe, sheltered.
aladen an n Idler, vagabond.
aladriv, a la driv attrib Drifting.
aladyann nan n Offspring of a Haitian and a
Dominican.
alafen, a la fen adv Finally.
alafwa, a la fwa adv Simultanously, at a time.
alagouj 1
attrib Vague, loose.
alagouj 2
adv Haphazardly. Yo prale alagouj
They are going aimlessly, with uncertainty.
alam nan n Alarm*. Bay alam To give the alarm.
alame vt To worry s.o. To alarm*.
alamen, a la men adv By hand.
alamòd, a la mòd attrib Fashionable.
alamyab adv Out of court, amiably*.
alanaj adv Swimming.
alanbik la n 1. Still (for the preparation of alcoholic
products). 2. Heavy drinker.
alantou 1
prep Around, about.
alantou a 2
n Vicinity, surroundings.
alantre adv At the entrance.
alanvè V lanvè
alaout V ararout
alapis 1
adv Stealthily, with muffed tread, on
tiptoes, like a spy.
alapis la 2
n Sandal.
alaploum adv Fast, in a jiffy. Sp.
alaronnbadè adv Without exception, all around.
alaronyay, alawonyay adv Lurking, prowling.
alatèt, a la tèt prep At the head of, in charge of.
(fig) Alatèt la The chief, the boss.
alatranp adv Mete bab ou alatranp Prepare for
what is coming. Wait for the consequences. Get ready
for anything.
alavòl adv On the wing, in flight.
albè Prank(s). Bay albè To kid s.o., to play a joke
on, to sock it to s.o.
albinòs la n Albino*.
ale a n Roadway, alley*.
ale wè pou Let alone, not to mention.
ale, al, ay (North) vi 1. To go (away), to depart,
to get away, to go off. M’ale I’m going. Good-bye.
Mon chè, ou al trò lwen kounyea My friend, now
you are overdoing it. Ki kote pou’m kouri ale?
Where can I run away to? Ale ak To match. Ale
vini The comings and goings. Ale sèlman One
way (ticket). Ale chèche To fetch. Tout lajounen
madanm mwen nan yon ale vini kay kouzin li All
day long, my wife goes back and forth to her cousin’s
house. Yon alemye An improvement, an amelioration
(in health, wealth, etc.). Ale wè pou Let alone.
Tigason an pa respekte papa’l, ale wè pou tant li
The boy doesn’t respect his father, let alone his aunt.
Sometimes, ale means to happen; it is often not
translated. L’al rive trò ta, papa’l te gen tan mouri
He happened to arrive too late. His father had already
died. Ale prese To rush, to hurry. Ale non Go on.
You may go. Ale pi dousman Slow down. 2. To
die, to pass away. 3. To defecate. Lò ou manje
prin, li fè ou ale fasilman When you eat prunes,
they make you go (to the toilet).
alè, a lè adv On time.
alega prep Toward.
alèjman an n Breather.
A 6
aleka adv Apart, by oneself, separate(ly).
alekè adv Level, plum-level, square*.
alèkile adv 1. Now, nowadays. 2. Thus, so. Se
sa ou di! Alèkile, m’pap ba ou sa ou mande a Is
that what you said! So, I won’t give you what you
asked for.
alekout adv Mete zòrèy alekout To listen attentively.
aleksiwa a n Breadfruit not completely ripe.
alèlè attrib Blah, blah. Bouch alèlè, lang alèlè
Indiscreet mouth, indiscreet tongue, blabbermouth.
Pa rakonte Mari sekrè ou, li gen dyòl alèlè Don’t
tell Mary your secrets. She talks too much. She is a
blabbermouth.
alelouya a n Hallelujah*. (interj) Alelouya
satan! Retro satanas! Go away!
alemye a n Improvement.
alenperatris adv Jwe topi alenperatris To spin the
top, and let it spin in the palm of your hand before it
touches the ground.
alèn nan 1
n Breath.
alèn nan, zalèn nan, alenn nan 2
n Awl. Kòdonye
sa a gen tout zouti, men kounyea li pa gen zalèn
pou’l fè trou nan soulye yo This shoemaker has all
the tools but now he doesn’t have an awl to punch
holes in the shoes.
alenterè, a lenterè adv With interest*. Prete lajan
alenterè To borrow (or lend) money with interest.
alèrending adv At a late and inopportune hour.
alès, a lès adv To the East.
aletranje adv Abroad.
alevini n Coming and going.
alevouzan interj Scram! Go away! Beat it!
alèz 1
attrib Confortable, at ease*. Li trè alèz nan
afè’l He is well off financially. Li alèz kou Blèz ki
chita sou chèz san pinèz He is sitting on top of the
world. Cf. E. Snug as a bug in a rug. Nonm sa a
pa alèz avè’m This man feels uneasy in my presence.
alèz 2
adv Easily*, leisurely.
alfabèt la n Alphabet*.
alfat V asfalt
alfò a, ralfò a n Neckbag, similar to a hunting
bag used by peasants. Sp. alforja.
alilin nan, anilin nan n Aniline* (an oily, watersoluble
liquid, used to make dyes, particularly
for cleaning shoes and for making ink).
alimèt la, zalimèt la n Match. Ou gen alimèt? Do
you have matches?
aliminyòm nan n Aluminum*.
aliyen vt To line up, to align*.
aliyman an n Alignment*.
alkòl la n 1. Alcohol*. 2. Alcoholic beverage.
alman an n German.
almanak la n Almanac*, calender. Ane a pral
fini; nou bezwen yon lòt almanak This year is
coming to an end; we need another almanac. The
term kalandrye is recently gaining ground.
Almay n Germany.
alo interj Hello!
alò conj Thus, then, so. V alòs.
alòke V alòske
alòmenm (ke) conj Even if, even when.
alonje V lonje
alòs conj Thus, so, then. V alò.
alòske, alòke conj While; whereas.
aloufa a n Heavy, insatiable eater, glutton. V afre,
saf.
Aloumandya n Grann Aloumandya A benevolent
spirit.
alsiyis la n Sighs of pleasure related to sex.
alte vt To stop, to halt*.
altèkasyon an n Altercation*, argument, discus-
sion.
alwès, a lwès adv To the west.
alyans la n 1. Wedding ring. 2. Alliance*.
alye a n Ally*.
alzan n Chestnut colored horse.
amadwe, anmadwe vt To sweet talk, to wheedle,
to cajole.
amak la, ramak la, ranmak la n Hammock*.
aman an n Lover. Nonm deyò is used when
referring to married women only.
amann nan n Fine (penalty).
amannkè a, amandkè a n Illicit lover.
amatè a, anmatè a 1
n Owner of a ship. Si m’te
wè amatè batiman an, m’ta mande’l ki lè l’ap pati
If I had seen the owner of the ship, I should have
asked him when it would leave.
amatè a, anmatè a 2
n Amateur* (non professional;
connaisseur), fan. Lwi se amatè tafya Louis loves
his liquor.
amati a n Framework.
ame vt To arm*, to furnish weapons.
amè V anmè
amèn interj Amen*.
ameriken an, meriken an n American*.
ami V zanmi
7 A
amigdal la, amidal la n Tonsils.
amilpye a, anmilpye a, annipye a, milpye a, milpat
la n Millipede*, centipede.
amitye a, lamitye a n 1. Friendship. 2. Type of
parasitic plant similar to Spanish moss.
amize, anmize vt To amuse*, to entertain. vpr
To enjoy one’s self. Li te amize’l anpil He had a
good time.
amizman an, anmizman an n 1. Entertainment,
amusement. 2. Roasted peanuts.
amò, a mò adv Very much, exceedingly. Li
renmen fi a amò He really loves this girl.
amonika a n Harmonica*.
amonyòm nan, amonnyòm nan n Harmonium*.
amòs la n 1. Bait. 2. Beginning, foretaste.
amòse vt 1. To prime. 2. To begin.
amòti vt To damp(en), to deaden.
amòtif la n Pus of an abscess.
amou V lanmou
amoure V anmore
amourèz V anmorèz
amwa V lamwa
amwenske conj Unless.
an 1
def art Determiner used after nasal vowels
(an, on, en) or one of the sounds mi, mou, ni,
nou. Mi an ro The wall is high. MORISSEAULEROY/A-7:
Gen yon malediksyon k’ap pousuiv
fanmi an There is a curse that is haunting the
family.
an 2
prep In, into, as, from, of. An ajan Silver.
An ò Gold. Dimanch an uit A week from Sunday.
Also used in the expressions: an premye (first),
an dènye (last), etc.
an 3
interj Oh!, Ah!, Oh well!
an 4
n Year. Senk an Five years. De zan (or)
Dezan Two years.
an sòtan (While) going out.
anache vt To harness* (a horse, a mule).
anachman an n Harness*, trappings, gear.
analize vt To analyse*.
anana a, zannanna a, annanna a n Pineapple.
anasi a, annasi a n Type of spider.
anba 1
adv 1. Below, down; downstairs. SYLVAIN-
11: Se ou k’anro, mwenmenm anba It’s you who
are above, I am below. 2. What’s below, the lower
part. 3. Anba anba Sly, sneaky.
anba 2
prep Below, beneath, under, underneath,
through, with the aid of, at the bottom of.
anbabra a, anba bra a n Armpit.
anbachal adv Secretly.
anbake vt To embark*, to put on board, to load
on board. vi To leave. Sa’k pa kontan, anbake
If you don’t like it, (take the boat and) leave.
anbakman an n Embarkment*, going on board.
anbalan attrib Hesitant.
anbale vt To pack.
anbandisyon attrib In rebellion.
anbandoulyè attrib Slung over the shoulder.
anbara a n Embarrassment*.
anbarasan attrib Cumbersome, embarrassing*.
anbarase 1
vt To confuse, to hinder, to embarrass,
to puzzle.
anbarase 2
attrib Embarrassed, clumsy; blocked,
not free to move; occupied, too busy; penniless,
broke, hard-up for money.
anbarasman an n Difficulties, financial or other.
anbasad la n Embassy. Pran anbasad To take
refuge in an embassy and ask for asylum.
anbasadè a n Ambassador*.
anbativant la, anba tivant la n Abdomen.
anbeka anbemòl Willy-nilly. (syn) Ou vle, ou pa
vle.
anbeli vt To beautify. vi To become more
beautiful; to clear up (weather).
anbeli a n Improvement in the weather. Depi
maten lapli ap tonbe, fèk gen yon ti anbeli In has
been raining since this morning; the sky has just
cleared.
anbelisman an n Beautification.
anbès, an bès attrib Faltering.
anbetan, enbetan attrib Annoying, troublesome;
teasing; boring. Lò marengwen ap rele nan tèt ou,
sa anbetan anpil When mosquitos are buzzing all
around you, it’s very annoying. Moun anbetan People
who tease, pain in the ass, sprite, elf, leprechaun,
goblin.
anbete, enbete vt To annoy, to bug, to tease, to
trouble. Pa anbete’m Don’t bother me.
anbetman an n Problems, troubles. Sa se yon
anbetman, mon chè That’s a (big) problem.
anbilans la n Ambulance*. Chak minit, anbilans
ap monte desann nan lari a Every minute ambulances
go up and down the street.
anbiskad la, biskad la n Ambush*.
anbisye, anbisyèz attrib Ambitious*.
anbisyon an, lanbisyon an n Ambition*, greed,
covetousness, pretentiousness.
A 8
anbonmen, bonmen vt 1. To perfume; to permeate
with a bad smell. 2. To embalm* (a dead
person).
anbouchi V lanbouchi
anboulatcha attrib Troubled, topsy-turvy.
anboulin adv Full speed ahead.
anboulvès attrib Troubled, topsy-turvy.
anbouteyay la n Bottleneck* (of traffic in a
road), traffic jam.
anbouteye vt To deceive through trickery causing
problems to s.o.
anbouye vt To entangle, to embroil*.
anbranl, an branl attrib Mete’n anbranl Start
moving.
anbrase vt To hug, to embrace*, to kiss.
anbrenzeng, sou brenzeng attrib Drunk, intoxicated.
Li sou brenzeng li He is drunk.
anbreyay la, anbreyaj la n Gear (auto).
anbreye vi To put in gear, to engage the gears.
anbrizi attrib Sickly, peaked, shabby, out of shape;
broke, penniless.
anbyans la n Atmosphere, ambiance*.
anbye, anbyè, an byè adv On a bias*, diagonally.
anchaje 1
vt To commission, to entrust, to charge
s.o. with a task. To be in charge*.
anchaje a 2
n The person in charge. Proxy.
anchalè, an chalè attrib In heat.
anchante attrib To be enchanted*, delighted,
happy.
anchatpent, an chat pent adv Stealthily.
anchennen vt To chain*.
ancheri vt To cherish*, to fondle, to like.
anchikèt, an chikèt adv One by one, sparingly,
little by little (holding back).
anchimè, an chimè attrib Moody, capricious,
sullen, chimerical*.
andaki adv In parables, in code. Pale andaki To
speak in code.
andanmis adv Secretly, furtively.
andebòdman, an debòdman attrib Overflowing.
andedan V anndan
andefas, an de fas adv Hypocritical.
andekonfiti, an dekonfiti attrib Shabby. (syn)
anbrizi, delala, dekonstonbre.
andenmon, an demon attrib Excited, out of
one’s mind, bold, obstinate.
andènye, an dènye adv Last.
andetay, an detay adv 1. In detail*. 2. Retail.
andèy, an dèy attrib In mourning, bereaved.
andeyò, andèrò, an deyò adv In the country, in
the countryside. Moun andeyò Peasant. prep
Outside of. Yo rete andeyò lavil la They live
outside of town.
andezakò, an dezakò attrib In disagreement. Yo
andezakò They disagree.
andezay V antdezay
andezo V antdezo
andi V andui
andirans la n Endurance*.
andire 1
vt To endure*, to suffer.
andire, ondire 2
It seems.
andizan, an dizan (While) saying. Andizan sa, sa
ou te fè apre? Since you mention it, what did you do
afterwards?
andjenikon an, oundjenikon, onjenikon n A
person who has been initiated and has received
training in Vodou songs and dances, and serves
as an assistant in the ceremonies. Choirmistress.
andjoze V andyoze
andomaje V domaje
andòmi vt 1. To put to sleep, to anesthetize.
2. To make numb. Koulèv andòmi Type of snake.
andose vt To endorse* (a check).
andoub, an doub attrib In duplicate*.
andouyèt V andui
andoye vt 1. To baptize in an emergency. 2. To
mark cards in order to be able to cheat.
andui a, andwi a, andouyèt 1
n Type of meat
preparation, also called andouyèt. Chitterlings.
andui a, andwi a, andi a, randui a 2
n A coating
of plaster, plastering, wall finish.
andui, randui 3
vt To coat, to plaster.
andwa, an dwa prep phr To have the right to. Li
an dwa fè sa He has the right to do it.
andyable attrib Uncontrolable, ferocious, out of
bounds.
andyoze, andjoze vt To lure, to seduce, to
entice, to cajole.
ane a, anne a, lane n Year. Ane pase Last year.
V an.
anemi an n Anemia*. Yo tout gen feblès anemi
All of them are anemic.
anetwale a, annetwale a n (Star) anise*, (Chinese)
anise (a spice).
9 A
anfale vi To collapse, to crumble, to fall down,
to subside (a building). Kay la gen yon bò ki
anfale The house has a side that has crumbled
down.
anfannkè a n Altar boy, censer-bearer, choirboy*,
acolyte.
anfanten, anfantin n Kindergarten.
anfarinay, an farinay attrib Muffled, low (voice,
etc.)
anfas, an fas 1
prep Opposite, facing*, across
(from). Gen dife anfas otèl la There is a fire
across from the hotel.
anfas, an fas 2
adv On the opposite side.
anfavè prep In favor* of.
anfè V lanfè
anfèje vt To corner, to do away with, to give a
hard time (to). Lavi ap anfèje’m Life has not
been very good to me.
anfèmen, afèmen vt To lease. M’afèmen kay
mwen an ak Rene I leased my house to Rene. Anri
afèmen yon kay nan men nonk mwen Henry leased
a house from my uncle.
anfen adv At last, finally*.
anfinal, an final adv Finally*, in the end.
anflajele, anfrajele vt To destroy, to ruin, to
make mincemeat of.
anflamasyon an, enflamasyon an n Tumefaction,
swelling, inflamation*.
anfle vi To swell, to bulge. Swollen. M’anfle’l ak
manti I filled him with lies.
anflèch, an flèch adv Fast and furious.
anfòm, an fòm attrib Comme il faut; well developed,
shapely, in shape; all set; properly.
anfondre vi To tumble down, to crumble, to
sink.
anfonse vt To drive in (a nail), to knock down.
vi To sink. Chak pa l’fè l’anfonse plis With each
step he sank more.
anfoudwaye, anfoudraye vt To drive s.o. crazy,
to ruin.
anfounen vt To put in(to) the oven, to bake.
anfouraye, anfouaye vt To misplace, to lose.
anfouye vt To misplace. Misplaced, lost among
many other things. Cf. anfouraye.
anfrajele V anflajele
ang la n Angle*.
angaje attrib Bound, in a jam, in difficult straits,
short of cash. M’bezwen prete di dola, m’angaje I
have to borrow ten dollars, I’m in a bad fix. Also
Vodou term. V angajman.
angajman an n 1. Obligation, promise, undertaking;
troubles, difficulty. 2. Contract with Baka,
with the devil.
angaway adv In desorder.
angi V zangi
angiz, an giz 1
prep Instead of, in place of.
angiz, an giz 2
conj Instead of. (syn) olye, pase
pou. PRESSOIR-9: Angiz yo bouche solèy la Instead
of hiding the sun.
angle a, anglè a 1
n English (language). Angle
waf Street English (acquired by practice only,
not formally).
angle a, anglè a, anglèz la 2
n Englishman*,
Englishwoman*.
angle, anglè 3
attrib English*.
angogay adv In abondance. (syn) agogo. DYESIFÒ:
Nou gen pwa rouj angogay We have plenty
of red beans.
angòje attrib To be blocked, obstructed. Tete
madan’m nan angòje. Li pa kabab bay ti bebe a tete
The woman’s breasts (teats) are blocked, and she
can’t breastfeed her baby.
angoudi vt To render dull, sleepy, numb, dormant.
angran attrib Presumptious, impudent, arrogant,
disrespectful.
angranman adv Haughtily.
angrave V agrave
angre a, angrè a n Fertilizer.
angren, an gren attrib Granulated, shelled.
angrenaj la n Gear.
angrese vt To fatten (animals).
angro, an gro adv Wholesale.
angrosi vt To get a woman pregnant.
angwas la n Anguish*.
anhan, aha interj So! (May have various inferences
depending on intonation).
ani V lanni
anika n Arnica*. Tenti danika Tincture* of arnica.
(Arnica: a plant of Europe).
anile, annile vt To cancel, to render void, to
nullify*.
animal la, annimal la, zannimo a n Beast, animal*.
anivèsè a n 1. Anniversary*. 2. Birthday. V fèt.
anizèt la, annizèt la n Anisette* (liqueur).
anj la, lanj la, jany la, zanj la, lezanj n Angel*.
Manje lèzanj Special Vodou ceremony held for the
loas. Lanj gadyen Guardian angel.
A 10
anjandre attrib 1. Violent, completely crazy. 2. Possessed
by the devil.
anjandreman an n Pact, engagement with the
devil.
anjelis la, lanjelis la n Angelus*. Dusk.
anjeneral, an jeneral adv In general*, generally.
anjwèt, an jwèt adv In jest, jokingly.
anka, oka, sianka, sioka, sizoka conj If, in case.
ankachèt, an kachèt adv Secretly.
ankadre vt To frame.
ankadreman an n Frame for pictures, framing.
ankatimini, an katimini adv Secretly, underhand-
edly.
ankave attrib Badly infected and full of pus.
ankè V antye
ankenn V okenn
ankese vt To catch and hold tight (a ball, etc.).
ankèt la n Investigation, inquiry, inquest*. Fè
ankèt To investigate, to inquire*.
anketè a n Investigator.
anklim nan n Anvil.
ankò adv Again, still, besides, extra. Si ou fè sa
ankò, m’ap kale ou If you do that once more, I’m
going to give you a beating. Used with pa (negative
particle) = not any longer, no longer, not any
more. PRESSOIR-25: Ti chen pa pè ankò The
puppy is no longer afraid. Kilès ankò? Who else?
What else?
ankonbre vt To crowd.
ankonbreman an n Crowding.
ankouraje vt To promote, to uphold, to cheer
on, to incite, to encourage*. Si ou pran yon vòlè
ou pa pini’l, se ankouraje w’ap ankouraje’l If you
catch a thief, and you don’t punish him, it’s as if
encouraging him.
ankourajman an n Encouragement*.
ankriye a, lankriye a n Inkwell.
anlagan adv In the beginning, from the start.
anlè a, an lè a 1
n Upper part, top.
anlè, an lè 2
adv Above, on top, on high, (up) in
the air*.
anlè, an lè 3
attrib Frivolous, flighty.
anlè, an lè 4
prep Above, on top of. Gade anlè
kay la, w’a wè tòl la Look on top of the house and
you’ll see the tin.
anmadwe V amadwe
anmatè V amatè
anmè, amè attrib Bitter. Anmè kon fyèl (or)
anmè kon lalwa Bitter as hell.
anmèdan, anmègdan attrib Troublesome, annoy-
ing.
anmède, anmègde, anmèkde vt To annoy, to
irritate, to tease, to bother, to nag. Not so strong
as its French cognate meaning ‘to shit around’.
Pa anmède’m Don’t bother me, let me alone.
anmèdè a n A bothersome person, a meddler, a
pain in the neck.
anmèdman an n Nuisance. Sa se yon anmèdman
It’s a pain in the neck.
anmenm attrib Unsatiated, unsatisfied (food,
love, etc.).
anmenmtan, an menm tan adv At the same
time, simultaneously.
anmidonnen vt To starch. V lanmidon, anpeze.
anmize V amize
anmizman V amizman
anmore a, amoure a, zanmore a n Lover, sweetheart,
boyfriend.
anmorèz la, amourèz la, anmòrèz la n Sweetheart
(fem), girlfriend. (Used mainly in the Jérémie
region: DYESIFÒ).
anmwe, anmre interj Help!
an’n v marker Let’s (particle used to form the
imperative of the first person plural). Also: annou,
an nou. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-2: An’n
seye sa’n gan la a pou’n wè sa k’a rive Let’s try
what we have to see what will happen. V annou.
annachis la, anachis la n Anarchist*.
annafè (ak), an afè (ak) prep phr 1. In business
with. 2. Involved with, to have an affair* with.
Li di li pat annafè ak fi a He denies that he had
any sexual relations with that woman.
annanfans attrib Senile.
annanna V anana
annannant V kannannant
annantye, an antye adv Whole, entirely*.
annaryè, an aryè, annèryè adv In the back,
behind.
annatandan, an atandan adv Meanwhile; until.
annavan, an avan adv Ahead, in front. Annavan!
Let’s go!
anndan, andedan 1
adv Inside, indoors, inward.
Li te bèl nèt sou anndan The interior was very
beautiful.
anndan, andedan 2
prep Inside of, within, into.
annefè, an efè adv In fact, indeed, really.
11 A
annega de, annegad prep phr 1. With regard* to,
regarding. 2. As for, as far as ... is concerned.
annekay, an ekay attrib Made of shell.
annekò, an nekò attrib Flooding, overflowing.
annèryè V annaryè
annik, nik adv Only, just. Annik di ‘men mwen’,
l’a konn se ou Just say ‘Here I am’, and he’ll know
it’s you. M’annik vini, Pyè mete deyò As soon as I
come, Peter leaves.
annile V anile
annimal V animal
annipye V amilpye
annivre V nivre
annòd adv In order*.
annou, an nou, an’n 1
v marker Let’s...(Particle
used to form the imperative of the first person
plural). V an’n. An nou li Let’s read.
annou, an nou 2
interj Come on! Let’s go! An
nou wè! Come on!
annui an, annwi an n Trouble, problem. Neve’m
ap ban’m anpil annui My nephew is causing me a
lot of troubles.
annuiyan, annwiyan attrib Annoying*.
annuiye, annwuiye vt 1. To annoy*, to bother.
2. To be bored, to be weary.
anonse, annonse vt To announce*, to notify.
anpàn, an pàn attrib 1. Out of order, stuck.
2. Short of.
anpare vt To take possession of, to invade, to
fill, to seize. Grangou fin anpare’m I am really
hungry.
anpase vpr To do without. Li pa kab anpase’l de
yo He cannot do without them.
anpatan, an patan adv To start with, in the first
place.
anpaye, paye vt To stuff, to cover with straw or
any other stuff (a chair, etc.).
anpeche vt To prevent, to hinder.
anpechman an n Hindrance, impediment, financial
difficulties.
anpenpan, an penpan attrib Swell, beautiful,
O.K., smart, elegant (neologism).
anpeny nan n Vamp (upper part of a shoe).
anpeste vt To permeate (evil odor).
anpetre attrib Slow, not at ease, indolent.
anpeze vt To starch.
anpil 1
attrib Numerous, many, scores of, a good
deal of, plenty of. Anpil moun Many people.
Anpil fwa Many times.
anpil 2
adv Very (when “anpil” is placed after an
attrib or a v). Yo bèl anpil They are very nice.
anpil3
attrib Insolent (mostly applied to children).
Timoun nan trò anpil, ou pa ka kontrole’l That
child is just too much (insolent); you can’t control
him.
anpile vt To pile * (up).
anpire vi To worsen.
anplasman an n Lot, a plot of land for building
purposes; concession of land; a location, a site.
M’achte yon anplasman nan simityè I bought a
cemetery lot.
anplat la n Plaster* cast.
anplimdezwa attrib Elegantly dressed.
anplis, an plis adv Besides; additionally, in addition;
more.
anplwaye 1
vt To hire, to engage (in employment);
to utilize, to employ*.
anplwaye a 2
n Clerk, employee*.
anpòte 1
vt To seize. Somèy anpòte’m I fell
asleep.
anpòte 2
attrib Angry.
anpoul la n Bulb (electric).
anpremye, an premye adv First. Li rive an
premye He arrived first.
anprent la n Print* (finger).
anpresman an n Hurry, eagerness, haste.
anprizonnen vt To jail, to imprison*.
anpwazonnen, pwazonnen vt To poison*.
anraje attrib 1. Rabid. 2. Mad, enraged*, furious,
irresponsible, crazy.
anrèg, an règ attrib In order.
anrejistre vt To record; to register*.
anreleng, an releng attrib 1. In rags. 2. Penniless.
anreta, an reta adv Late.
anrichi vt To enrich*.
anrimen attrib To have a runny or stopped up
nose. To have or catch a cold.
anro a, anwo a 1
n Upper part, top.
anro, anwo 2
prep On, over, on top of, above.
Anro kay la Over the house. In southern Haiti
‘anro’ also means ‘about, concerning’. Sa w’ap
di anro’m nan? What are you saying about me?
Anro lavil Uptown, in the upper part of town.
anro, anwo 3
adv Upstairs, above, up, upward.
A 12
anrole, anwole vi To enlist (in the armed forces,
etc.).
anrout, an rout adv En route*, on the way.
ansan V lansan
ansanm 1
adv Together. Mete ansanm To assemble*,
to put together, to unite. Ansanm avèk With, together
with.
ansanm nan 2
n Ensemble*, band.
ansanswa a n Censer*, thurifer.
ansasen V asasen
ansasinen, asasinen, sasinen vt To kill, to murder,
to assassinate*. Semèn pase a, yo ansasinen’l Last
week, they murdered him.
ansekirite, an sekirite attrib Safe.
ansent 1
attrib Pregnant. Enceinte*. Also: grovant,
gròs.
ansent 2
vt To impregnate (to make pregnant).
ansèt la, zansèt la n Ancestor*, forefather, forebears
(pl). Se zansèt nou ki te goumen pou ban
nou libète It was our ancestors who fought to give
us liberty.
ansèy la n Sign*, sign on a store.
anseye vt To teach.
ansibreka attrib Failing, not too good (health,
etc.).
ansiskatde, an sis kat de adv In a jiffy.
ansite attrib Safe.
ansòt, an sòt In such a way that. Fè ansòt pou ou
rive a lè Try to be on time.
ansoudin, an soudin adv Secretly.
ansuit, answuit adv Then, aferwards. Ansuit, sa’k
rive? Then, what happened?
ansyen attrib 1. Old, antique, ancient*. Ansyen
ayisyen Old style Haitian. 2. Ex-, former. Ansyen
prezidan Former president.
ant, antre prep Between, among. Ant Jakmèl ak
Jeremi, gen anpil mòn There are many mountains
between Jacmel and Jérémie. Antre yo Between
them.
antan V etan
antann vi 1. To mean. Kisa ou antann pa la?
What do you mean by that? 2. To intend*, to be
out to (usually in a negative sentence). M’pa
antann pèdi’l I don’t intend to lose it. vpr To
agree (more than one person), to have an understanding;
to get along. Yo antann yo They
have an understanding (or) they get along.
antannman an n Understanding, comprehention.
antant la n Understanding, agreement. Yo fè yon
antant They reached an agreement.
antase vt To pile up.
antay la n Notch, gash, slashing. Fè yon antay
To hack.
antchenkon adv Piecemeal, bit by bit. (syn)
anchikèt.
antchoutchout V antyoutyout
antchouprèt V antyoupwèt
antdezay, andezay attrib Middle-aged*.
antdezo, andezo adv Underneath the surface of
the water.
ante attrib 1. Haunted*. 2. Fantastic, extraordinary.
Se bagay ante It’s fantastic.
antè, an tè attrib Earthen.
antèman an n Funeral, burial, interment*.
anténwa V antónwa
antere, tere vt To bury.
antete attrib Stubborn, willful.
antiche attrib To be hot after, to persist, to be
persistent.
antipichlin V antipislin
antipile vt To pile* up. (syn) anpile.
antipislin, antipichlin adv Secretly, furtively, surreptitiously,
a little at a time.
antiray V antouray
antò, an tò attrib At fault, wrong, guilty.
antónwa a, anténwa a n 1. Funnel. 2. Whirlpool.
antòs la, antòch la n Sprain, twist. V fouli.
antòtiye, antòtye attrib Tangled up. V makònen,
mele.
antou, an tou adv Altogether.
antouka, an tou ka In any event, anyhow, in any
case, at any rate.
antoupwèt V antyoupwèt
antouray la, antiray la, lantiray la, lantouray la n
Fence, enclosure. V kloti.
antoure vt To surround.
antranp, an tranp attrib Soaking. Mouye an tranp
Soaking wet.
antrav la n A difficult, worrisome and compromising
situation; problem, difficulty, worry, handicap,
mess, bad spot. Jip antrav Straight skirt
(the lower part of the dress is tight).
antravan attrib Compromising.
antrave vt To implicate, to put s.o. in an embarrassing
situation. Li antrave zanmi’l He put his
friend in a bad spot. M’pa gen ase lajan pou’m
13 A
peye; m’antrave. I don’t have enough money to pay.
I find myself in a difficult situation.
antravè, an travè adv Crosswise, obliquely, across.
Li kouche antravè sou kabann nan He lay across the
bed.
antre 1
vi To enter*, to come in, to get in, to
penetrate, to step in. Antre nan chanm nan To
enter the room. Kouri antre Dash in. Fè antre To
show in, to let in. Antre nan pè To go into the
seminary. Antre nan mè To go into (join) the
convent. Youn antre nan lòt One takes care of
(compensates for) the other. Antre sou moun To
become (too) familiar. Antre sòti To come and go, to
get in and out. vt To put inside. Antre chat la,
men lapli Bring the cat inside; it’s going to rain.
Antre lan manch la Take the sleeve in a little.
antre a 2
n 1. Entrance*, opening. Bèl antre
Splendid entrance. Li gen bèl antre He is gap-toothed.
2. Admission. Antre lib Free admission.
antre 3
V ant
antremetè a (m), antremetèz la (f) n Meddlesome.
antrene vi To train*, to drill, to practice.
antrenè a n Coach, trainer*.
antrènman an n Training*, practice, drill. Fè
antrènman To drill, to practice.
antreprann vt To undertake, to take on.
antreprenan attrib Enterprising*.
antreprenè a n Undertaker.
antrèt, an trèt adv By treason, without warning,
unexpectedly.
antretan, antre tan adv Meanwhile, in the mean-
time.
antretni vt To maintain, to keep. Li antretni kay
li byen He keeps his house well. Anri ap antretni
Jozefin Henry keeps Josephine as his mistress.
antrot, antròt By the way.
antye, ankè attrib Entire*, whole. An antye In its
entirety, entirely. Yo manje yon kodenn antye They
ate a whole turkey.
antyèman adv Completely, entirely*.
antyoupwèt, antoupwèt, antchouprèt attrib Restless,
nosy, excited. (syn) antyoutyout.
antyoutyout, antchoutchout attrib Restless, excessively
curious, excited. (syn) antyoupwèt.
anvan, avan 1
prep 1. Before (time). Anvan
lontan Before long. Avan samdi Before Saturday.
2. Before (distance, order). Si ou soti Pòtoprens
ou pral Okap, w’ap rive Sen Mak anvan Gonayiv If
you go from Port-au-Prince to Cape Haitian, you
will reach St Marc before Gonaïves. Anvan tout
bagay First of all, in the first place.
anvan, avan 2
conj Before. Anvan w’ale, di’m
Tell me before leaving. Avan solèy kouche Before
sundown.
anvan, avan 3
adv Before; first. Vini anvan To
come first.
anvayi 1
vt To invade*. To crowd in, to surround
in great numbers.
anvayi 2
attrib To be flooded (carburator).
anve, an ve attrib Bound by a vow*.
anvenimen V anvlimen
anverite, an verite adv Frankly, verily*, in God’s
truth.
anvi 1
vt To yearn for, to desire, to wish, to
want. Ou pa konn sa m’anvi fè? Don’t you know
what I want to do?
anvi a 2
n 1. Desire, craving. Gen anvi To have
an appetite for, to have a mind to. 2. Envy*. 3. Birthmark
which is the result of a woman’s craving
during her pregnancy. Anvi kochon A birthmark
with hairs on it.
anvi, an vi 3
attrib Alive. Yo te kwè li te mouri men
li anvi They thought he had died but he is (still)
alive.
anvitès, an vitès adv Fast, in a jiffy.
anvizaje vt To consider, to envisage*.
anvlimen, anvenimen vi To get worse; to fester
(a wound, a scab). To swell.
anvlòp la n Envelope*.
anvoute vt To cast a spell, to hex. To be possessed.
Li anvoute He has been possessed by a bad spirit.
anvye 1
vt To envy, to be jealous of.
anvye (m), anvyèz (f) 2
attrib Envious*.
anwe attrib Hoarse.
any interj Exclamation denoting disgust, disap-
proval.
anyen, aryen indef pron Nothing. Sa pa fè’m
anyen It’s all the same to me. Sa ou wè laba a?
Anyen What do you see over there? Nothing.
anzingdekontraryete, an zing de kontrarye-te attrib
Moody, in a bad mood, angry.
ap v marker Auxiliary of the present progressive.
V ape, pe. ONEC/N-19: Depi nou fèt se sou tè a
n’ap viv Since we were born it is on this land we
have been living. ONEC/N-5: Lò yon sitwayen ap
pase devan drapo li When a citizen is passing
before his flag. PRESSOIR-10: M’konnen m’ap mouri
aswè I know I shall die tonight.
apa, a pa 1
attrib Particular, private, apart*, special.
apa, a pa 2
prep Beside, apart* from.
apa, a pa 3
adv Separately.
A 14
apa, epa 4
interj Introductory particle used in
semi-exclamatory, semi-interrogative sen-tences.
Apa li menm ki te ba ou’l! Was it not he who gave
it to you? Apa w’ap etidye italyen! So you’re studying
Italian, eh! Apa li, papa! Did I not tell you so?
apach attrib Greedy.
apagon attrib Avaricious.
apantay la n Surveying.
apante vt To survey (land).
apantè a n (Land) surveyor.
aparans V laparans
aparèy la n Tool, instrument, device, gear, appliance
(electric); penis.
apatandejodi, apatandojodi adv Henceforth.
apati de prep Starting from, as of.
apatman an n Apartment*.
ape v marker Auxiliary of the present progressive
tense. SYLVAIN-14: M’ape chante depi de jou I
have been singing for two days. MORISSEAULEROY/A-39:
Se tonton ou, Wa Kreon, ki ape
pale ak ou It is your uncle, King Creon, who is
talking to you. V ap, pe.
apèl la n (Law) Appeal*; invitation to convene.
Fè apèl To note an appeal; to make the rollcall.
apèn, apenn adv Hardly, scarcely, with difficulty.
apendis la n Appendix* (of the body).
apendisit la n Appendicitis*.
apeprè, apepre adv Nearly, about, approximately.
apeprèman adv Nearly, about, approximately.
apèsevwa vt To catch a glimpse of, to see.
apèsi 1
vt To get a glimpse of, to perceive*.
apèsi a 2
n Preview, glimpse.
apeti a, lapeti a n Appetite*. Pa apeti pou For
love of. Ak apeti Heartily.
api a, apui a n Support. M’ap pran api sou ou
I’m leaning on you, and using you to prop me up.
Apui chèz (or) do chèz Back of a chair.
apik, a pik attrib Steep, abrupt, precipitous.
Apik panno Very steep, almost vertical.
apiye, piye, apuiye vi To lean. Apiye sou To
lean on.
aplani, plani, planni vt To level.
aplikasyon an n Application*.
aplim attrib 1. Aggressive. 2. Eager (for). (syn)
akrèk.
aplodi vi To applaud*. (syn) bat bravo.
aplodisman an n Applause*, cheer.
apopleksi a n Apoplexy*. Apopleksi se yon maladi
ki pa ra Apoplexy is not a rare sickness.
apot la, apòt la n Apostle*.
apotikè a n Pharmacist, druggist.
apoura attrib 1. Gluttonous. (syn) saf, afre.
2. Greedy and aggressive.
apòy 1
attrib 1. Agressive, bold, unscrupulous.
2. Eager.
apòy, pòy 2
attrib Lèt apòy Last milk taken from a
cow during a session. FRANKE-TIENNE/B-17: Yon
melanj lèt apòy ak siro myèl siro loja.
aprale, apral, prale, pral Am, is, are going (Progressive
present of the verb ale, to go ). SYLVAIN-
26: Kote ou aprale? Where are you going? FARDIN-
17: Kote ou prale? Where are you going?
aprann vt 1. To learn. 2. To teach.
apranti a n Apprentice*.
aprantisay la n Apprenticeship*.
apray, pray Nothern forms of apral and pral.
apre, aprè, apwe 1
prep After. Apre demen Day
after tomorrow. Apre midi Afternoon.
apre, aprè, apwe 2
conj After.
apre, aprè, apwe 3
adv Afterwards, subsequently,
next.
apredemen, apre demen adv Day after tomorrow.
apredye a n Money.
apremidi a, apre midi a n Afternoon.
apresye vt To appreciate*.
aproche V proche
apropode, apropo de prep Concerning. Apropo
de sa nou tap pale a Concerning what we were
talking about.
aprouve vt To approve*, to be in accord.
apsan V absan
apsoliman V absoliman
apwal, a pwal, apwèl adv Bareback.
apwentman an n Salary, pay, wage(s), earnings.
apye, a pye adv On foot.
Arab la n Arab*.
aran an n Herring*.
aranbarik la, aran barik la n Kipper.
aranje vpr To manage, to arrange*.
aranjman an n 1. Agreement, settlement, arrangement*.
Pito ou fè yon aranjman pase ou fè
yon prosè It’s better to make a settlement than to
undergo a law suit. 2. Border, trimming (of
clothes).
15 A
aransèl la n Dried, salted herring* (different
from aransò, undergoes a distinct process. Also
known as ‘aranbarik’).
aransò a n Kippered, red herring*, which has
turned brownish by a special process.
ararout la, alaout la n Arrow-root*. A tropical
plant the rhizomes of which yield a nutritious
starch called sagou flour, used in puddings.
arebò prep At the edge of.
arendal la n Connections, prestige. Livelihood,
means.
arenyen V areye
arèt la 1
n 1. Rest*, arrest*, respite. 2. Means of
defense, protective magic (string with knots)
placed around a child’s neck or arm. 3. Guard
for the (wedding) ring.
arèt la 2
n Fish bone. Li manje trò vit, arèt
pwason koke nan gòj li He ate too fast; a fish bone
stuck in his throat.
arete vt To arrest*, to put in jail, to detain, to
apprehend.
arètkòl la, arèt kòl la n Tie clasp.
areye a, zarenyen an, arenyen an, ariyen an n
Spider.
areyeakrab la, zarenyen a krab, krabaren-yen n
Tarantula. Also: krab areye.
arimen vt To pile up, to stack one on top of the
other in a specific manner, to stow.
aristokrat la n Aristocrat*.
aritmetik la n Arithmetic*.
arive vi To go as far as to. Li arive di’m sekrè’l
He went as far as to tell me his secret.
arivis la n Newly-rich, parvenu, upstart.
aro, awo attrib Swell. Se yon bagay aro That’s
swell.
arogan, awogan attrib Arrogant*.
arogans la, awogans la n Arrogance*.
arona a, awona a n 1. Loose woman. 2. Common
prostitute.
arousa a, awousa a n Pickpocket, looter; greedy
person.
aroutchapatcha a n Arab, levantine.
arouya a n Hick, stupid person, fool.
aroyo attrib Violent. Li fin aroyo He is furious,
wild.
aryè 1
adv Back, rear*. Annaryè, annèryè In the
back. Alaryè To the rear.
aryè a 2
n Fullback (soccer).
aryen V anyen
aryennafè a n Idle person, lazy bum.
aryere attrib Backward, old-fashioned.
aryoplàn nan n Airplane*. V avyon.
as V las
asafetida a, safetida a n Asafetida*.
Asansyon an n Feast of the Ascension*.
asasen an, ansasen an, sasen an n Murderer,
assassin*.
asayi vt To assault*.
ase adv 1. Enough, only, alone; somewhat. Se pa
pen ase ki fè moun viv Man liveth not by bread
alone. 2. Stop, enough of. Ase pale Stop talking.
(Enough is enough).
Asefi n Name given to a female child when
parents wish no more daughters.
Aselòm n Name given to a male child when
parents wish no more sons.
asenik la, lasini an, asini an n Arsenic*.
asepte V aksepte
asetòn nan n Acetone*.
asètsèzè adv At this (unduly) hour.
asezonnen, sezonnen vt To season*.
asezonnman an n Seasoning*.
asfalt la, alfat la n Asphalt*.
asfalte vt To asphalt*, to pave.
asid la n 1. Acid*. 2. Condiment (vinegar, lemon,
etc.).
asidròp la n Lemon punch.
asipoze prep phr Supposing*, suppose*, let us
suppose (that).
asirans la n 1. Assurance*, guarantee, certainty.
Bay asirans To assure. 2. Insurance (life, health).
asire vt 1. To assure*, to guarantee. Asire ou
Make sure. Asire pa sèten Unreliable. 2. To
insure* (a house, a car, etc.)
asireman adv Surely*.
asistan an n Helper, assistant*.
asistans la n 1. Attendance, audience. 2. Aid,
assistance*.
asiste vt 1. To be present at, to attend. 2. To
assist*, to help.
asiyasyon an n Subpoena, summons (to court).
asiyen vt To summon(s), to subpoena.
aso a 1
n 1. Assault*.
aso a 2
n A (beating) board used for striking at a
percussion instrument (COURLANDER).
A 16
ason an n The cult priest’s ritual rattle with
external strikers (COURLANDER). Liturgical
tchatcha.
Asonmsyon an, Asonpsyon an n Feast of the
Assumption*.
asorosi V sorosi
asosye 1
vpr To associate one’s self.
asosye a 2
n Partner, associate*. An nou koupe
asosye, an nou jwe asosye Let’s become real partners;
let’s play partners. A children’s game in which
two children join their little fingers, then strike
the juncture with the other hand.
asòtò a n Assotor* drum, the largest of the
drums, of African heritage, used as a liturgical
instrument. A ritual dance is performed around
it.
asoupi n 1. Nap. 2. Sleepiness, drowsiness.
CELESTIN-MEGIE/1-60: L’ap fè yon ti asoupi
He is taking a nap, he is dozing. (syn) kabicha.
aspèj la n Asparagus*.
aspiral la, spiral la n Spiral* (of a watch, etc.).
aspirin nan n Aspirin*.
aswè adv Tonight, at night, in the evening. Aswè
a This (coming) evening. Yon aswè One evening.
asye a, lasye a n Steel.
asyèt la n Plate, dish; plateful. Pòl lan asyèt li
Paul is in his element (That’s exactly what he
was waiting for).
ata adv Even. Ata oumenm Even you. Cf. Sp.
hasta.
atable vi To sit around the table* to eat.
atache attrib Attached*. Bòn nan trè atache ak
tibebe a The maid is quite attached to the baby.
atachman an n Attachment*, devotion.
atak la, latak la n Attack*; offense, offensive.
atake vt To attack*, to assail.
atan, a tan adv On time.
atann vpr To expect. Also in the expression
‘sanzatann’, unexpectedly, all of a sudden.
M’atann mwen a sa I expect that.
atansyon an n 1. Attention*; precaution. 2. Intelligence,
grasp. Atansyon! Look out. Fè atansyon!
(or) Fètatansyon! Be careful! Beware!
atchoum interj The sound of sneezing. Kerchoo!
ate a n Atheist*.
atè, a tè adv On the ground; ashore. Dòmi atè
To sleep on the floor. Pye atè Barefoot. Met atè To
give birth (or) to put something on the ground.
atelye a n Workshop.
atèmiyò a n Poorly made mat, crude mat.
atenn vt To reach.
ateri vi 1. To land (airplane). 2. To wind up
somewhere.
aticho a n 1. Artichoke*. 2. Type of loaf (bread).
atife adv Slowly, gradually.
atik la n Article*.
atiran attrib Appealing, attractive*.
atirans la n Attraction*.
atire vt To entice, to pull, to attract*, to draw.
Atire atansyon sou To call attention to.
atis la n Artist*.
atiyayo a n Medicinal plant (Ocimum gratissimum
L.). It is used to combat dizziness and common
colds.
atizan an n Artisan*.
atle vt To yoke, to hitch, to team up. Atle yon
bogi To hitch up a buggy.
atò adv Then, at that time, indeed, now; so.
Atò, se kounyea ou vini! So, you only come now! Se
atò... It was then that...
atòkile adv Now, nowadays.
atou a, datou n 1. Trump (cards). 2. Connections.
(syn) piston.
atoufè attrib Unscrupulous.
atout V ak tout
atrap vt 1. To catch. M’atrap boul la I caught the
ball. 2. To receive with hostile words. Ou pa
bezwen atrap mwen kon sa You don’t have to make
a scene like that with me.
atrapan attrib Contagious, catching.
atrape, trape vt To catch (a disease).
atroupman an n Gathering, throng, crowd.
ava 1
attrib Stingy, avaricious*, miserly, greedy.
(syn) peng, apagon.
ava, av 2
v marker Auxiliary of the future tense
corresponding to ‘shall’, ‘will’. (syn) a, va.
DEJEAN-79: N’ava achte pou tèt pa nou You will
buy for yourselves. PRESSOIR-11: San ou m’ava
mouri tousuit Without you, I shall die at once.
avadra a n Vagabond.
aval la 1
n Guarantee (financial).
aval, val 2
Will go (Future tense of the verb ‘ale’,
to go).
avalize vt To vouch for (a borrower).
avalizè a n Guarantor.
avalwa a n Advance (down payment). M’bay
tayè a yon avalwa sou kostim nan I gave the tailor
a down payment on the suit.
17 A
avan an, avannsant la 1
n Forward (soccer).
avan V anvan 2
avangou a n Foretaste, preview. (syn) apèsi.
avanjou, avan jou adv Before dawn.
avannsant V avan
avanpòs la n Outpost* (military).
avans la n 1. Down payment, advance* payment.
2. Advance, attentions. Anri ap fè fi a avans Henry
is making amorous advances to the girl. 3. Alavans,
davans In advance, in anticipation of. Depi davans
Beforehand. M’te pale ou davans I told you in
advance. I forewarned you.
avanse, vanse vt To bring forward, to move
forward. Avanse chèz la Move the chair forward ;
to bring forward (a date). vi To advance*, to
step forward, to approach, to go forward, to
draw near. Vanse sou Going toward, getting closer
to.
avantaj la, avantay la n Advantage*, profit, benefit.
avantaje vt 1. To do favors for, to favor. 2. To
give.
avanti a n Adventure*.
avanvèy la, lavanvèy la n Two days before. Li
rive lavanvèy lantèman an He arrived two days
before the burial.
avanyè, avantyè, avanzyè adv The day before
yesterday.
avap, avape v marker Auxiliary of the progressive
future. M’avap manje lè sa a I shall be eating
then.
ave a 1
n A plant. Petiveria alliacea L. It is given
to patients suffering from fever.
ave a 2
n Admission of wrongdoing. Li fè ave lan
tribinal la He confessed in open court.
avè V avèk
avèg n & attrib Blind.
avegle, vegle vt To blind, to dazzle.
avèk, avè, ak, a, ake prep With. Avè’m, avè’l
With me, with him. The form ‘ake’ is used in the
North. Lwen ak isit Far from here. Gen menm
valè ak To have the same value as. Tou pre ak
Very near to. conj Pyè ak Pòl Peter and Paul.
avès la, anvès la n Short, sudden shower; downpour.
V lapli.
avèti, vèti vt To warn, to inform, to let s.o.
know, to advise.
avètisman an n Warning.
avi a 1
n Notice, communique.
avi, a vi 2
attrib For life, lifetime.
avidèy adv Visibly, openly, outwardly.
avili vt To put down, to degrade.
avilisman an n Debasement.
avize vt To inform, to let s.o. know, to advise*.
avni an 1
n Avenue*.
avni an, lavni 2
n Future. Destiny.
avoka a n Lawyer, attorney.
avoran, devoran attrib Greedy, grabbing, biting;
grasping.
avòte vi To abort*, to fail.
avòtman an n Abortion*. Fè avòtman To have
an abortion.
avril n April*.
avwa a n Possession(s).
avwàn nan n Oats, oatmeal.
avwe vt To confess, to acknowlege, to recognize,
to avow*.
avyasyon an n Airport; aviation*.
avyatè a n Airplane pilot, aeroplane pilot.
avyon an n Airplane.
awo V aro
awona V arona
awousa V arousa
awoutsayd, awoutsay Off side* (games).
awoze V rouze
ay 1
interj Ouch!
ay V ale 2
ayayay interj Wow! Exclamation expressing various
feelings (joy, disappointment, surprise, etc.).
ayè V yè
ayèl la n Ancestor.
ayeroplàn nan, areyoplàn nan n Airplane*.
ayeropò a n Airport*.
ayibobo V abobo
Ayida n A woman who has very short hair by
nature.
Ayida-Wèdo n Vodou deity.
ayik attrib 1. Exhausted. Li tèlman pale, m’ayik
He spoke so much, I am exhausted. 2. Sick (from
overeating).
Ayisyen an n Haitian.
Ayiti cheri, Haiti cheri A Haitian song by Othello
Bayard expressing the nostalgic feeling of Haitians
for the homeland.
Ayiti, Haiti n Haiti. Se nan peyi Ayiti Toma ou ye
You’re in the country of Haiti Thomas; that’s where
B 18
you are. Cf. articles by Louis Vernet and G.
Jolibois, in Le Nouvelliste, Jan. 1973. According
to some people, Toma refers to the name of an
African ethnic group.
aza a n 1. Chance. 2. Gambling, hazard*. Jwèt
aza, je aza Gambling (game). Pa aza Accidentally,
by chance
azade vpr To dare, to venture, to take the liberty
to.
Azaka Vodou deity.
azaman adv Rarely, accidentally (pop).
azamann nan n Gambler.
azaris la n Gambler.
azaryen an n Gambler.
azible a n Breadfruit that has suffered from
sunstroke. V azòzòt.
aziboutou, azilboutou, azoboutou n Unknown
place, Timbuktu.
azikòkò a n A sickness for which there is no
cure. A problem you can not get rid of. V akòkò,
pongongon.
azil la n Shelter. Cf. E. asylum*.
azireya a n Worthless, ignorant person. (syn)
sanzave, vakabon.
azizwèl la n Strumpet, loose woman, kate; worthless
person.
azobato attrib Exhausted, faded. V dekrenmen,
defrechi.
azobòkò a n Coffin.
azoumounou an n Sickness of the eyes.
azòzòt la n Breadfruit that has suffered from
sunstroke and which has not fully ripened.
B
ba 1
attrib Low, short (in stature), low (in spirit,
health).
ba 2
adv Low. Pale pi ba Speak in a lower tone.
ba a 3
n Helm, tiller (boat’s).
ba a 4
n Kiss. Fè ba pou To give a kiss to
(children) V bo a.
ba a 5
n Stocking. Li mete ba pou fredi a She
wears stockings because of the cold weather.
ba a 6
n Bar*, iron bar, soap bar; wooden or
iron bar to close a door.
ba a 7
n Pack-saddle.
ba a, bar la 8
n Line (with a pen, a pencil).
ba a, bar la 9
n Bar*, cafe (where alcoholic
beverages are sold).
ba V bay (prep) 10
ba V bay (verb) 11
bab la, labab n Whiskers (of a person, a cat);
beard, tassel. Fè labab To shave. Bab pou bab
Eye to eye, face to face. In order to kid s.o. with a
large beard, one says: bab pis, bab pou, bab
karang i.e. full of lice. Jwe nan bab Not to show
the proper respect for, to act unduly familiar with
s.o. Bab kabrit Goatee. Cf. babemoustach, babmayi,
babpanyòl.
baba attrib Mute, bewildered. Li rete baba devan
fi a He was bewildered with admiration in the
presence of the girl.
babako a, brabako a n Barbecue*. Scrumptious
outdoor feast featuring barbecued meat, fish,
yams, etc., celebrating some special event. Fè
babako To go on an eating and drinking spree; to
carouse.
babaren an, balbaren an n Goatfish, red mullet.
babay, baybay interj Bye-bye*.
babemoustach attrib Fantastic; the whole thing.
Li ban’m yon avantaj babemoustach He gave me
the full advantage (more than I expected).
babich la n Goatee, small beard*.
babin nan n 1. Double chin. 2. Dewlap.
babmayi a, bab mayi a n Corn silk, tassel (It is
used to make an infusion).
babòtribò V tribòbabò
baboukèt la n Noseband (of a bridle), a piece
of harness; the last piece that is put on an animal
to keep its mouth shut. Bay baboukèt To shut
s.o.’s mouth. Mete yon baboukèt nan dyòl bourik la
Put a noseband on the donkey’s mouth.
babouye vt To smear.
babouzi a n Child. An insignificant person.
babpanyòl la, bab panyòl la n Spanish moss,
parasite. An epiphytic bromeliaceous plant found
in thread-like matted clusters hanging from trees
in warm climates. It is used as a medicinal plant.
babyadò a n Grumbler, complainer.
babye vi To grumble, to gripe, to mumble to
one’s self. To babble, to talk too much. Depi
maten l’ap babye He’s been grumbling since this
morning.
bacha a n Big shot, wealthy landowner. V pacha.
bade vt To smear, to be smeared. Li bade labou
He is full of mud.
badijonnen vt To smear.
badin nan n Cane, walking-stick.
19 B
badinen, badnen vi To jest, to play, to joke, to
talk foolishly, to play around; to fool around, to
trifle.
badji a n In a Vodou temple, the room where
the altar is.
badjikan an n A bòkò’s helper (folklore).
badnen V badinen
baf la n Slap.
baflay la n Slap on the face. V sabò. Si ou pa
pe, m’ap ba ou yon baflay If you don’t shut up, I’m
going to slap your face.
bafle V bafre
bafon an n Ravine; low, poor sections of a city.
bafray la n Bluff, deceit.
bafre, bafle vi To stuff one’s self with food, to
gobble.
bafrezè a n Liar, bluffer, cheater.
bafwe, bafre vt To deceive.
bag la n Ring, wedding ring, wedding band.
V arèt. Bag monseyè Episcopal ring.
bagarè a n Troublemaker; quarrelsome, rowdy
person.
bagas la n Crushed sugar cane, refuse. Bagasse*.
bagay la n 1. Object, thing (in all its meanings).
Dènye bagay, chak bagay, tout bagay Everything.
Nenpòt bagay Anything; whatever, whatsoever. Yon
bagay One thing, something. Ki bagay? What?
Yon lòt bagay Something else. 2. Genitals.
bagèt la n Stick, rod, wand, drum stick; type of
drum. Bagèt ginen A grotesquely twisted drum
stick (COURLANDER).
bajou 1
n Lè bajou kase At dawn.
bajou a, bajòl la, majòl la 2
n Double chin.
bak la 1
n 1. Ferryboat, flat-bottom boat. 2. A
wooden tray carried on the head by vendors of
clothes, candies, etc. Jisten pa mennen bak li byen
Justin doesn’t run his business well. He doesn’t
behave properly.
bak, bak annaryè 2
adv As in ‘Fè bak’, to back*
away; not to fulfil a promise or an engagement;
to go into reverse, to go backwards. Li taprale
pa bak It was going backwards.
baka a n 1. Varicose ulcer (esp) on feet. 2. Evil
spirit; a Vodou animal, usually a large black
dog. Baka makaron Ugliest creature possible. Ou
sanble baka sou lajan! Boy, you are extremely ugly!
bakaloreya a n Final examination in a secondary
school.
bakanal la, bakannal la n Orgy, bacchanal*.
bakle vt To botch (up), to work fast and carelessly,
to dash (something) off.
bakoko Yon bakoko A heap, a pile, a lot. Yon
bakoko rad lesiv A heap of clothes to clean (laundry).
bakon an n Huge shed where products are
temporarily stored before shipping.
bakonyè a n Con man, schemer, woman-chaser,
one who tries to trick women; trickster in general.
bakoulou a n Crook, pilferer; con man, wily
liar, trickster, deceiver, cunning double-dealer,
particularly where women are concerned. An
under-handed fellow who knows what’s what.
Cf. bakonyè. Ti medam yo pa vle koute msye; yo
konnen li se bakoulou The girls won’t pay attention
to that man. They know he is an impostor, a foreflusher,
where women are concerned.
bakoulouz la n Same as ‘bakoulou’ but used for
female beings. V bakoulou.
baksayd la n Backside*, behind, rear, buttocks.
E.
bal la 1
n Dancing party, ball*, dance.
bal la 2
n Bullet. Bay bal To execute by shooting.
Li pran bal nan do He got a bullet in his back. Bal
maron Stray bullet.
bal la 3
n Bale* (cotton, etc.)
balan attrib Hanging. Mache bra balan To walk
nonchalantly, with arms dangling. An balan Unde-
cided.
balans la n Scale(s) (for weighing). Balance*.
Chak maten anvan li benyen, li monte sou balans
pou li pran pwa’l Each morning before bathing he
weighs himself.
balanse vt To balance*, to sway, to rock, to
swing. Balanse yon motè To start a motor. An’n
balanse Let’s start, let’s go.
balansin nan n Swing. (syn) balanswa. Nan
lekòl sa a gen balansin pou timoun In this school
there are swings for children. Fè balansin To
swing.
balanswa a n Swing. (More commonly used is
the word ‘balansin’).
balaro a, balao a, balarou a n Ballyhoo* (Type
of fish).
bale 1
vt To sweep.
bale a 2
n Broom, mop. Also type of plant used
as food for pigs and used by some people to
find out if s.o. is telling the truth. Bale plim
Feather duster. Bwa bale Broom handle. Pay bale
The straw part of brooms. Pase bale la a Give it a
fast sweep.
balèn nan, balenn nan, labalèn n 1. Whale. Pi
gro pwason ki nan lanmè se balèn The whale is the
biggest fish (mammal) in the ocean. 2. Candle made
from whale blubber whereas a ‘bouji’ is made
of wax. Cf. blanbalenn. 3. (whalebone) Stays
used to stiffen corsets.
B 20
balerina a n A type of woman’s shoe. <It. ‘bal-
lerina’.
balerouze, bale rouze Fè yon balerouze To make a
clean-up, to make a clean sweep; to dismiss (fire) a
large number of employees. Minis la fè yon bale
rouze lapòs The minister fired many employees in
the post office.
balis la n Balustrade*, baluster*, banister*. Kay
sa a te dwe gen balis nan balkon an This house
should have a balustrade in the balcony.
balistrad la n Balustrade*, banister*, rail, railing.
balizay la n The action of cutting trees, shrubs,
etc. and clearing same in order to establish the
boundary line (generally between two pieces of
real estate). Mèt balizay The person in charge of
a ‘balizay’ operation.
balize vt To clear the land. 2. To devastate, to
lay waste. Van balize tè a The wind cleared the
land. Siklòn nan balize peyi a The hurricane
devastated the country.
balkon an n Balcony*. Kay balkon House with
an upper story and a balcony.
balo a n Bale*. (syn) bal.
balon an 1
n Balloon*.
balon an 2
n Ball* (soccer, volley ball).
balonnen vi To be puffed up, full, swollen,
bloated.
balonnman an n Bloated stomach.
bamann nan n Barman*, bartender*.
ban V bay 1
ban an 2
n Bench, seat. M’konnen pase’l; m’kab
mete’l sou ban I know more than he does; I could
teach him one or two things. V bankrich.
ban an 3
n Ban*, marriage bans. Pibliye ban To
publish the marriage bans.
banbi a n 1. Buttocks. 2. Banquet, celebration,
party.
banbilay la n Party, celebration. Li pa sa fè
ekonomi; tout lajan’l pase lan banbilay He can’t
save any money; he spends all of it on parties.
banbile vi To enjoy one’s self merrily; to go on
a spree, to revel; to lead a fast life, to carouse.
V banboche.
banbòch la n Feast, revelry, celebration, party.
banboche vi To rejoice, to celebrate; to enjoy
one’s self, to have a good time.
banbochè a n Carouser, reveler, dissipated person.
banbolo a n Feast, revelry, celebration, party.
banbou a n 1. Bamboo*. 2. Also a musical
instrument made from bamboo. Soufle lan banbou
To piddle away one’s time. V vaksin.
banboula a n 1. A drum used by inhabitants of
the Caribbean. 2. A dance. 3. Loud merrymaking,
dancing and singing.
banda 1
attrib Elegant, superb, show-off; in stylish
fashion. Fè (gran) banda To show off. To act big.
Li taye banda li jan li vle He does what he pleases.
Pale banda To be a good speaker, to express one’s
self elegantly.
banda a 2
n Dance rhythm (folklore).
bandaman adv Elegantly.
banday la, bandaj la n Bandage*.
bande 1
vt To bandage*.
bande 2
vi To get an erection. Li bande alaryè
He went out of bounds, he was so angry.
bandi a n Bandit*, rascal; cruel, ruffian.
bandisyon V anbandisyon
bando a n Hairband.
bandòl V bandròl
bandonnen V abandonnen
bandoulyè a n Shoulder strap. An bandoulyè
Slung across one’s shoulder.
bandròl la 1
n Whipping, spanking.
bandròl la, bandòl la 2
n Banner. An bandòl
Slung across the shoulder.
bandyo a, bandjo a n Bandjo*.
banj la n ‘Tops’, authority (on a subject).
bank la 1
n 1. A bank (in gambling). Bank bòlèt
Counter where bòlèt (popular lottery) tickets are sold
and redeemed. 2. Drinking table (gathering of
drinkers). (usu) bank tafya. 3. Fè bank To
make a lot of noise, a mess, a fuss, a scandal, to
cause a rompus. Timoun yo ap fè bank The children
are making a lot of noise.
bank V labank 2
bankal attrib Bandy-legged; rickety or arched
(legs). Janm bankal (or) pye bankal Legs that
open outward, like a gorilla’s. Yo bankal They are
shaky (Said of objects with uneven legs).
banke (avèk, sou) vi To meet (by chance).
M’banke avè’l lan kalfou a I met him at the corner.
bankèt la n Small wooden bench (for one or
two persons).
bankrich la n A piece of furniture with two or
more holes specially made to hold water jugs
(krich).
bann nan n 1. Heap, flock, troup, band* (in all
its meanings). Yon bann A lot of, a group of. Yon
bann ak yon pakèt Lots and lots of. 2. Musical
band and people parading on the streets (they
dance in the streets at Carnival time). 3. A strip
of linen. Bann machwa a, bann machwè a Chinband
(ordinarily for a corpse). 4. A hard on, an
21 B
erection. Pèdi bann To go astray, to lose one’s
group or Carnival band; to become impotent. 5. Strap
(of sandals).
bannann nan n Plantain. (The banana fruit is
called ‘fig’ in Creole; what is called ‘fig’ in English,
is usually called ‘fig Frans’ in Creole). There
are many types of plantains in Haiti. Ou bannann
You are done for, you are lost. Al bannann To be
all over with. Bannann peze Fried banana. Sèvolan
an bannann The kite went into a tailspin and fell to
the ground. Types of plantains: kouyak, poban,
etc.
bannannmi an, bannann mi an n A small bird
that is yellow and black. Icterus domini-censis.
Also a fish.
banyè V labanyè
banza a n 1. Musical instrument similar to a
banjo. 2. Bow to shoot arrows.
bar la, ba a n Bar*, cafe. Ouvri yon bar To set up
a bar.
barad la n Good measure, surplus, a little extra.
V degi, ranje.
barak 1
attrib Hefty (man, animal).
barak la 2
n 1. Pen (for animals). 2. Shack,
shanty. 3. Type of insect with very strong wings.
barank la n In the central region of Haiti, a
ravine that has been dug by water. Cf. Sp. bar-
ranco.
bare 1
vt 1. To surprise, to catch (red handed);
to prevent s.o. from passing, to stop; to fence
in; to block (a road), to conceal, to hide, etc.;
to lock , to bar*. Li lan bare He’s in a spot, in a
difficult situation. Bare ak To meet up with, to
fall, to run into. DEJEAN-61: Li bare ak yon bann
asasen He fell upon a band of killers. 2. To cross
out, to erase (grade, mark). Zero bare An
emphatic zero.
bare 2
attrib ‘Broke’, temporarily out of funds.
barèt la n Barrette*.
barik la n Barrel*. Yon barik poud A barrel of
powder. Ti barik Keg.
barikad la n Barricade*, dam.
baro a, bawo a n Bar*, rung (of a ladder), cross
piece.
baròk, bawòk attrib Vulgar, brutal and gruff.
baromèt la n Barometer*.
baron an n Baron*. Baron Samdi God of the dead
(folklore).
baryè a, bayè a n 1. Gate, barrier*. 2. Bar*,
hindrance. Li soti pou’l ban’m baryè He decides
(wants) to block my path. He is creating obstacles for
me. 3. Gap (in teeth).
bas 1
attrib Low. In some expressions like Mezon
bas A one storey house.
bas la 2
n 1. Base* (basso) instrument, (usu) a
guitar. 2. A finger drum, resembling a tambourine
(COURLANDER). 3. Low card. 4. Sentre
bas To put the squeeze on.
basen an n 1. Swimming pool, bathtub (fixture),
basin*. 2. Pond, whirlpool. 3. Chamber pot.
Pote basen pou malad la Bring the chamber pot for
the patient. 4. Pelvis, lower abdomen. Mwen
santi yon doulè ki kenbe’m nan ba-sen’m I feel a
pain in the lower part of my belly.
basèt la n 1. A plump, short woman. 2. Shortlegged
chicken. (usu) Used adjectivally to denote
anything of small stature. Chen basèt Basset*
dog.
basinen vt To rub.
baskètbòl la n Basketball*.
baskil la n Dump mechanism on a truck.
baskile 1
vt To cock (gun, rifle).
baskile 2
vi To tip over.
baskou a n Farm yard, chicken yard.
bason an n 1. Bassoon*. 2. Low card.
bat vt 1. To spank, to beat, to trounce, to thrash.
2. To beat, win (over). Examples and expressions:
Bat bravo To applaud. Bat ba To submit,
to accept defeat, to come down (off one’s high horse).
Bat kòd To turn the rope while playing jump rope.
Bat kat To shuffle cards. Bat bèt To study hard.
Bat do To pat on the back, to cajole. Bat je To
wink, to blink. Bat men To clap one’s hands, to
applaud. Bat pitimi To beat millet. Apre’l fin bat
tout lavil la, l’ateri kay tant li After having wandered
all over the town, he landed at his aunt’s house.
Bat fè To exercize by lifting weights. Bat vant To
worm secrets out of s.o. Zwazo a bat zèl li The bird
flapped its wings. Yo bat vòlè a nan tèt sèlman
They struck the thief on the head only. Pa bat kò
ou, tout bagay ap regle Don’t worry, everything will
be all right. Bat lakanpay To be in the throes of
death. vi 1. To fight, to struggle. 2. To be in
convulsions.
bata 1
adv Almost. Li te bata touye lòt la He
almost killed the other one.
bata 2
attrib Bastard*, illegitimate.
bataklan an, batanklan an n Paraphernalia, kit,
caboodle, shebang, junk.
batan an n Panel of a double door. Fèmen yon
batan pòt, kite lòt la Close one of the double doors,
and leave the other open.
batay 1
vi To fight.
batay la 2
n Battle*, brawl. Ou pa nan batay You
are out of the running, you have no chance to win.
B 22
bate 1
vi To wear long stockings. Li fè fredi,
anpil moun bate It’s quite cold; many people are
wearing stockings.
bate 2
vt To put a pack-saddle on a donkey or
mule.
batèm nan, batenm nan n Baptism*; blessing
(of a house, a boat, etc.).
batey la n Sugar cane plant (enterprise), particularly
in the Dominican Republic.
batèz la n Egg-beater.
bati vt To build, to construct. Bati yon ak To
draw up an official document.
batiman an n Large boat, ship. V bato. Batiman
vapè Steamboat.
batis la 1
n Baptist*.
batis la 2
n Construction, building, house.
batisman an n (Large) building, construction.
Nan tout batisman yo, ganyen ki pa solid In all
these buildings, there are some which are not solid.
batistè a n 1. Birth certificate, baptistery*. Montre’m
batistè ou Show me your birth certificate.
2. Act (certificate) of recognition (affiliation).
Papa’l rekonèt li; li ba li batistè His father has
officially recognized him as his son (He granted
him the certificate of affiliation, an official legal
act).
batize vt 1. To baptize*, to be the godfather or
the godmother (of). Se li menm ki te batize’m
He is my godfather (or) He baptized me (priest).
Batize yon maryaj To be the best man or the maid of
honor at a wedding. 2. To improve on the taste
by adding something. For instance, to add one
finger of whisky to a glass of tea. To add a little
salt to a food that was cooked without salt for a
sick person would be expressed by: batize manje
a ak yon ti sèl.
batman an n Beating, beat. Batman pou Pulse
beat.
batmandkè a n Heartbeat, heart tremor.
bato a n (Large) boat, craft. V batiman.
baton an n Stick, staff, rod, (policeman’s) billy,
cudgel; cane. Kout baton Blow with a club, beating.
Pitit mwen sa a se baton vyeyès mwen This child of
mine will provide for me in my old age. Bay baton,
simen baton To beat with a stick, to spank. Baton
ke Tail. Baton lakre Piece of chalk. Ou ret chita
sou baton rozèt ou You remain listless and indifferent
when you have a duty to act.
batonnen vt To beat with a stick.
batri a n 1. (Car) battery*, electric battery. 2. Magic
spell or object sometimes designed to harm. Yo
voye yon batri wanga sou li They cast a spell on
him. 3. A group of drums (percussion). 4. Batri
kuizin Cooking utensils. 5. An batri At work, in
use.
batriba a n Ups and downs (physical and figurative).
Anvan ou rive Jakmèl, fòk ou fè anpil
batriba Before reaching Jacmel, you go through lots
of ups and downs.
batwa a, batwè a, batwèl la n Bat*, batter*,
paddle. A large board to beat clothes while washing
them.
batwèl V batwa
bav la, bave a n Slobber, foam at the mouth.
bave vi To foam, to drivel, to drool. Lò timoun
ap fè dan, yo bave anpil When little children are
teething they drivel a lot.
bavèt la n Bib.
bawo V baro
bay la 1
n One bushel.
bay la 2
n Large bucket, (wash)tub, usually
wooden, with handles.
bay, ba, ban 3
vi To reach. Ròb li ba’l sou jenou
Her dress reaches her knees. Bay sou To overlook,
to face. Fenèt mwen bay sou lakou a My window
overlooks the yard.
bay, ba, ban 4
prep When bay is used as a
preposition, it means ‘to’, ‘for’. M’ap pote yo ba
ou I am bringing them to you. Ouvri pòt la ban
mwen Open the door for me.
bay, ba, ban 5
vt Ba is used instead of bay
before one of these indirect object personal pronouns:
ou, w, li, l, yo. Nou ba’l youn We gave
him one. Ban is used before one of these indirect
object personal pronouns: ‘mwen’, ‘m’, ‘nou’,
‘n’ which begin with a nasal sound. Ex. Ban’m
sa a Give me this one. Although in this last case
some people use ba (ba’m youn), the form
ban is more natural. 1. To give. 2. To yield, to
produce. 3. To give away, to distribute. 4. To
vacate (a house), to clear (an area). 5. To tell
(a story). 6. To denounce, to betray. Examples
and expressions: Bay baton, bay chaplèt To cudgel.
Bay lòd To order, to command. Bay manti To lie
(tell a falsehood). Bay travay To employ, to give
work (to). Bay lanmen To shake hands. Bay kout
lang To backbite. Bay odyans To tell stories, to
chat. Bay kou To strike, to hit, to beat. Bay
demisyon To resign. Ban’m la a! Get out! Se
mwa ki bay anpil lapli It’s a month that produces
rain. Se mwen ki pou bay (It’s) My deal! (during
card games). Ban’m lè la a Make room for me!
Get out! Ban’m nouvèl ou How are you? What’s
new? Bay chalè To tease. Bay fòm To shape. Bay
bouden To tell lies; to deceive. Bay chans 1. To
bring luck. 2. To give a break. Bay chenn 1. To
wind (a watch). 2. To prod, to encourage s.o. to
reveal something by insinuation. Bay dyapòt To
vomit. Bay egzeyat To release (a patient from a
hospital). Bay baryè To put obstacles to, to hamper,
to block. Bay fil 1. To help s.o. get ahead. 2. To
give s.o. enough rope to hang himself. Bay gabèl
To give odds, to give a head start, an advantage.
Bay jòf 1. To give a peek 2. To expose what was
23 B
not supposed to be seen. Bay koutba To deceive, to
fail s.o. Bay kout tèt To bow one’s head repeatedly
while dozing off. Bay lebra To extend one’s arm to.
Bay legen To give up. Bay payèt To show off. Bay
poto To stand s.o. up. Bay siro To turn the rope
slowly in the children’s game of jump rope. Bay
vinèg To turn the rope fast in jump rope. Bay
roulib To give a ride (in a vehicle). Bay zoklo
1. To give a blow with one’s knuckles. 2. To be
unfaithful to one’s spouse.
bayakou a n 1. A person employed by a city to
clean outhouses. 2. The morning star.
bayaronn nan n Bayahonda*, mesquite, thorn
acacia. Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) P. DC.
baye vi 1. To yawn. 2. To be wide open.
bayè V baryè
bayila vi To dance.
bayonèt la, bayonnèt la n 1. Saber, bayonet*.
Spanish blade. Nan tan bayonèt During the time
before the American occupation of Haiti. 2. (bot)
Yucca aloifolia L. Spanish bayonet.
baz la n Base*, basis*.
baza a n Bazaar*, store.
baze vpr To base*, to found. M’te baze’m sou
òlòj legliz la I relied on the church clock.
bazilik la n (Common) Basil*. Ocimum basilicum
L. A medicinal herb used to make tea; as a
narcotic, to bring good luck.
bazoudi vi To stun, to daze. Nouvèl la bazoudi’m
The news stunned me.
be attrib Bay*. Chwal be Bay horse.
bè 1
interj Bleating of a goat.
bè a 2
n Butter*. V mantèg. Pwa bè A type of
bean.
bè a 3
n Bay* (geogr).
bebe a n 1. Baby*, beloved, a beautiful woman.
Cf. E. babe. Twa bebe sòti Leogàn o! Pou sedui
nèg Pòtoprens o! (Opening lines to a popular
song). 2. Ti bebe Small child, infant. 3. Smallest
of the Vodou drums.
bèbè attrib Mute. In Jérémie: boubou. (fig)
spellbound, amazed, dumbstruck, speechless. Li
rete bèbè devan fi a ki te si tèlman bèl She was so
beautiful, he was dumbstruck.
bèbèl la n 1. Beauty; garnishment, decoration.
2. Something pretty, smart-looking, gratious,
sugar-coated. Se fèt li demen, m’pral fè yon bèbèl
ak li It’s her birthday tomorrow. I’m going to do
something nice for her. Yo fè sa pou bèbèl They do
that for decoration. Fè bèbèl ak To be very kind to,
to go out of one’s way to please.
bebidòl la n Babydoll*. Also: a short negligé.
bèf la n Any bovine animal (ox, steer, bull,
cow). More specially: Manman bèf Cow. Toro
(or) Toro bèf Bull. Lèt bèf Cow’s milk. Vyann
bèf Beef*. Bèf kabwèt Draft-ox. Tibèf Calf. Gazèl
Heifer. Fè tibèf To suck (oral sex).
bèfchenn nan n Helper, jumper on a truck; one
who works hard. Sekretè is also used, because
many jumpers do not like to be called ‘bèfchenn’.
bèfsipa a n Zebu (Indian humped ox). So called
because it was imported into the country by the
S.C.I.P.A. organization.
bege vi To stammer, to stutter. Moun bege
Stuttering people. Moun bege enève fasil People
who stutter become easily irritated. Pa vin bege ban
mwen Stop mumbling and tell me what’s what.
begle vi To bellow, to moo, to roar.
bègwè attrib A bewildered fool, idiot, simpleton.
(fig) Cuckold. Ou sanble ak yon bègwè You look
like a simpleton.
bèj attrib Beige*.
bèje a n Shepherd. (syn) gadò.
bèk la n Beak*. Mouth (pej). Also: prepuce
(extra long skin). Bay bèk To snap at, to rebuke,
to rebuff. Fè yon bèk To succeed, to hit, i.e. to mark
up a point. (Fè) bèk atè To fall, to fail, to be down
and out, to go down. Rete bèk sèch To be left with
nothing. Siye bèk atè To swear never to repeat the
offense. Soulye a ap fè bèk The point of the shoe
has turned upward. Ouvri bèk ou Talk! Open your
darn mouth (pej). Yon bèk fè (bèkfè) An old
person.
bekàn nan n Bike. V bisiklèt.
bekasin nan n Snipe, sandpiper (bird).
beke vt 1. To strike with the beak, to peck (at).
2. To answer curtly, to be rude, to snap at. Gran
sè a ap beke ti sè a tout tan The older sister is
always cutting her younger sister short, scolding
her.
bèkèkè attrib Empty-handed. DEJEAN-64: Yo ret
bèkèkè They were empty-handed, dumbfounded.
beki a n Crutch. Li gen yon pye kase, li oblije
mache sou beki He broke his foot; he has to use
crutches.
bekin nan n Fish similar to barracuda. Sphyraena
barracuda.
bekon an n Bacon*. The more common word is
la(r).
bèl attrib Lovely, beautiful, fair, fine, pretty, good
looking, attractive, nice. Fè bèl To be pregnant.
Fè yon bèl ak To show kindness to, to do something
nice for s.o.
bèlantre a n An approach to an entrance in the
form of an arch. Also applied to a large gap
between teeth.
bèldenui an n Four-o’clock (flower).
B 24
bèldriv, bèl driv adv Long ago. Gen bèldriv depi
l’ale He left a long time ago.
bèlen an n Sore (hard to heal).
bèletwal la, bèletwèl la n Girl with easy (loose)
morals.
bèlfi a n Daughter-in-law; stepdaughter. Bèl ti
bèlfi’l la His beautiful stepdaughter.
bèlmè a n Mother-in-law; stepmother.
bèlsè a, bèlsò a n Sister-in-law. Sè madanm mwen
se bèlsè’m My wife’s sister is my sister-in-law.
bèlte a n Beauty*, splendor, magnificence.
belye a, belye kabrit la n Buck, ram. V bouk.
ben an, beny lan 1
n Bath. V bendmè. Ben vapè
Bath in a tub of hot water with medicinal leaves.
ben V byen 2
benbo Depi lan tan benbo A long, long time ago.
bendmè a, beny mè a n Swim or bath in the sea.
benediksyon an, labenediksyon n Blessing, bene-
diction*.
benefis la n Profit, gain, benefit*. Cf. E. benefice*.
Tout moun fè komès pou fè benefis Everybody gets
into business to derive some profit from it.
benefisye vi To profit (by), to benefit*.
benevòlman adv Listlessly, without care.
benezwèl la, benndezwèl la n Type of fighting
cock, without feathers on parts of the body (neck,
legs, etc.). Originally from Venezuela*.
beng Ding (onom). Sound of a bell.
beni vt To bless. Bondye va beni ou God will bless
you (reward). Beni bag To marry.
benis Dye benis God bless you. (Phrase which is
generally uttered when one sneezes).
benit, beni attrib Blessed. Dlo benit Holy water.
Latè benit Blessed land.
benitye a, bennitye a n Holy-water basin; baptismal
font.
benlengendeng nan n Junk, paraphernalia, odd
objects, useless possessions.
benn vt 1. To bend*. Yo benn li ak manti They
packed him with lies. 2. To beat hard, to give a
good thrashing.
beny lan n (Same as ben an) Bath. Also: ritual
bath. Beny chans A special bath to bring you luck.
benyè a n Person who gives the last bath to the
deceased.
benyen 1
vt To bathe, to give a bath to. vi To
take a bath, to bathe.
benyen an 2
n Fritter, beignet*.
benywa a, beywa a n Washtub, bathtub. (usu)
Refers to a metal, portable one. The bathtub
which is a concrete fixture is called ‘basen’.
benzolivye a, benzoliv la n Horseradish tree.
Moringa oleifera Lam.
bere vt 1. To butter*. L’ap bere pen’l He is
buttering his bread. 2. (fig) To butter up, to
treat well, to pamper. Lè m’fin bere msye, m’ap
pran sa m’vle nan men’l After I’ve buttered the
man up, I get what I want from him.
berè a, bere a n Bonnet. Beret*.
berejèn nan, berejenn nan n Eggplant.
bese vt To lower, to minimize. To put down, to
reduce. Bese volim nan Put the volume down. vi
To decline, to sink, to diminish, to go down.
To subside (floodwater). It is also said of a sick
person whose health is deteriorating: Malad la
ap bese The patient’s health is deteriorating.
beseleve To perform various chores in a house.
Samdi se jou beseleve Saturday is the day to take
care of the chores at home.
bèso a n Cradle.
bestyo n Cattle.
bèt 1
attrib Stupid.
bèt la 2
n Beast*, animal. (pl) cattle. Ti bèt
Insect. Fè bèt To be plentiful, to abound. Nan
jaden’l, pye mango fè bèt In his garden, mango
trees are plentiful. Bèt chay Beast of burden. Pran
bèt 1. To acquire knowledge. 2. To copy from s.o.
else’s paper during an examination, to cheat. Also:
pran poul.
betiz la n Nonsense, foolishness, absurdity; obscenities;
insults. Mete nan betiz (or) Pase nan
betiz To ridicule, to sneer (at). Si ou pa rete, m’ap
di ou kèk betiz If you don’t stop, I’m going to cuss
(curse) you out.
betize vt To kid, to joke, to ridicule. vi To talk
foolishly; to fool around.
betizè a n Kidder, one who is not serious, one
who raves on.
beton an, breton an n Cement, concrete, beton*;
pavement. Beton ame Reinforced concrete. Koule
beton sou kay la Cover the roof with concrete. Li
sou beton an He is walking the streets (or) He is
out of work.
bètrav la, bètrouj la n Beet*.
bètrouj V bètrav
bètseren an, bèt seren an n 1. Soldier, guard.
2. Night owl (person).
bètvolay la, bèt volay la n Fowl.
bèzè a n Fop; vainglorious, conceited ass.
bezig la n Bezik* (card game).
25 B
bezwen 1
vt To need, to have to. Ou pa bezwen
plenn There is no need to complain.
bezwen an 2
n Need, necessity. (euph) for
kaka. Fè bezwen To defecate.
bi a 1
n Aim, target, purpose. Nan ki bi ou fè sa?
What did you do that for?
bi a 2
n Goal (in soccer). (syn) gòl.
bib V labib
bibi 1
attrib Sick, ailing (baby talk).
bibi a 2
n Biceps.
bibikrankran an n Something hard to get rid of.
(syn) pongongon. Fi sa a se yon bibikrankran pou
li He is stuck with that woman.
bibit Darling! My little one!
bibliyotèk la, bibyotèk la, biblotèk la n Library.
biblo a n Small decorative statue in a room.
Fanm nan se yon biblo That woman is a beauty.
bibon an, bibron an n Baby’s bottle with the
nipple.
bich la n Chunk, a big piece.
bichèt la n Round tray made chiefly of palm
leaves or reeds.
bichi Interj Nothing! All in vain! PAURIS-34:
Tou sa yo fè, bichi.
bidèt la n Bidet*.
bidje a n Budget*.
bidòl la n Money.
bidon an n Large tin container which is used to
carry or measure (oil, syrup, etc.)
bidonvil la n Slum area.
bidyonnèl la, bidjonnèl la, bidyonèl la n Coin
operated phonograph.
bif la n Beef*.
bife, bifte vt To cross out.
bifèt la n Small sideboard, cupboard.
bigare, bigarèt attrib Streaked, motley, many-
colored.
bigay la n Tiny mosquito, gnat.
bigote a n Moustache.
bigoudi a n Hair set.
bije V oblije
bijou a n Jewel, jewelry.
bijoutri a n Jewelry shop.
bijoutye a n Jeweler.
bika a n Large marble (toy).
bikabonat la n Baking soda. Bicarbonate*.
bikini an n Bikini* (two piece bathing suit for
women).
bikwach la n Type of bread made from manioc.
It is also called bobori.
bil la 1
n Bubble*. Bil savon Soap bubble.
bil la 2
n Bile*. Brase bil (or) bouyi bil To
torment, to trouble. Tout paròl sa yo tap chofe bil
mwen All these words were getting me hot (angry).
bilding nan n Building*, edifice, structure, house.
biliwin nan, bilirin nan n Alcoholic beverage,
liquor. Li anba biliwin He is drunk.
bilten an n Report card (elementary school).
bilye V bliye
bimen vt To beat, to hit, to thrash, to pound, to
rough up, to smash, to crush mercilessly, to
kick a person with a vengeance. Li bimen nonm
nan lan gou’l He beat the man to his heart’s content.
bip interj (onom) Boom! (Sound of something
falling, of heavy footsteps).
biren an n Chisel.
biro a, biwo a n Bureau*; office; desk.
bis la 1
n Bust* (of a statue). Gen yon bis Desalin
nan mize a There is a bust of Dessalines in the
museum.
bis 2
interj Encore! Repeat! (Interj) of approval.
bise vt To repeat a performance.
bisèp la n Biceps*.
bisiklèt la n Bicycle*, bike. V bekàn.
biskad V anbiskad
biske vt 1. To lurk. Also: biske kò. 2. To
powder up, to beautify one’s self.
biskèt la n Cartilage at the lower end of the
sternum (breastbone). Xiphoid appendix. Cf.
Fr. brechet* and E. brisket*. Biskèt tonbe Displacement
of the sternum causing vomiting, fever,
etc. Kè’l sou biskèt He was extremely anxious and
worried at what would happen.
biskuit la, biswit la, bisuit la n Roll (never
sweet), consequently, perhaps not to be translated
as ‘cookies’ which one would usually call ‘biskuit
dous’ or ‘bonbon’. Biskuit sale Crackers. Also
Biscuit*.
bisuit V biskuit
bit 1
attrib Huge. Yon gro bit chen A huge dog.
bit la 2
n Mound; hilly place.
bitad la n Misstep, tripping.
bitasyon 1
Yon bitasyon A lot of, many.
bitasyon V abitation 2
B 26
bitay la n Stumbling, fall.
bitch la n Beach* (American neologism). V plaj.
bite vt To bank up earth around a plant, to
prop. vi To stumble, to trip. Mwen bite, m’manke
pran yon so I tripped; I almost fell. Bite sou To
stumble upon, to run into, to bump into (by chance).
biten an 1
n Booty*.
biten an 2
n Things, belongings.
bitò, bitòk attrib 1. Hard to handle, stubborn
(donkey). 2. Uncouth, ill-mannered, irrascible.
biva a n Blotting (absorbing) paper.
bivèt la n Bar where refreshments are served at a
dance. V kanbiz.
biy la n Marble (toy).
biya a n Billiards*, pool (game). Bèl pati biya
It’s wonderful! FRANKETIENNE/D-275: Bèl pati
biya, lè men nou kwaze kontre ak zeklè!
biye a, biyè a 1
n 1. Note, letter. 2. Ticket
(admission ticket, lottery ticket). 3. Paper money.
biye V abiye 2
biyòt la n Block of wood (usu) used as a seat.
biza attrib Bizarre*, queer.
bizango a n Evildoer belonging to a group (folklore).
FRANKETIENNE/D-251: Bizango danse
kalinda nan kalfou.
bizayèl la, bizawèl la n Great grandparent.
biznaw n Something. Ban’m yon ti biznaw Give
me a little something. Pa yon biznaw Nothing at
all.
biznis la n Business*; (usu) illegal profit, contraband,
black market.
biznismann nan n Businessman* (Often pejora-
tive).
blabla, ablabla, rablabla, blablabla vi To talk
nonsense, to trifle; to babble.
blad la n 1. Bladder*. Also: blad pise, blad
pipi. 2. (play) Balloon.
blag la n Joke, figment of the imagination, story,
fib. Fè blag (or) Blage To joke. Blag apa I’m
not kidding. This is no joke. This is for real. Ban’m
yon blag Tell me a joke.
blage vi To talk, to chat, to tell stories, to joke.
Yo pito blage pase yo travay They like to chat more
than to work.
blagè a n Teller of tall stories.
blakaout la, blakawout la n Black-out*, power
failure.
blakbòl la, plakbòl la n Shoe polish.
blakin nan n Shoe polish. From E. Blacking*.
blam nan, blanm nan n Blame*, censure, rebuke.
blame, blamen, blanmen vt To scold, to blame*
severely, to reprimand, to chide, to rebuke.
blan 1
attrib White. Dra blan White sheet, shroud.
Kite’l an blan Leave it (in) blank. Blan tankou
dan zonbi White as snow.
blan an 2
n White (man). Stranger, foreigner;
clever, comme il faut. Blan mannan Poor white.
Also: Blan poban. Yon blan meriken An American.
Yon blan franse A Frenchman.
blanbalenn nan, blan balenn nan n Candle
made from whale blubber.
blanch attrib White. (Used in certain phrases
only). Fanm blanch White woman. Dan blanch
White teeth.
blanchi vt To whiten, to bleach*. To kill with a
bullet. vi 1. To turn pale. Tout rouj blanchi
Everything red fades. 2. To have gray hair. M’wè
ou fin blanchi I see your hair has turned gray.
blanchisri a n Laundry.
blanm V blam
blanmen V blame
blanpoul la, blan poul la n Breast (of chicken).
blanze a, blan ze a n White of eggs.
blayi 1
vt 1. To spread. To spread the wash to
dry, usually on white stones, to bleach in the
sun. 2. To knock s.o. down with a hard blow.
M’wè nèg la blayi atè a I saw the man lying on the
ground.
blayi a 2
n Stone pile where one spreads the
linen (wash) to dry. Tann rad yo sou blayi a pou
yo sa seche Spread the clothes on the pile to dry.
blayisman an n Spreading, spread; influence.
Stasyon radyo sa a gen anpil blayisman This radio
station has widespead influence.
blaze attrib Faded (clothes); faded out (person).
ble 1
n & attrib Blue*. Ble maren Navy blue. Ble
digo Indigo blue. Gro ble Blue material to make
clothes.
ble 2
vt To overwhelm. Li ble’m anba manti He
filled me up with lies. He made me (black and)
blue*.
ble a 3
n Wheat.
blèg la n Trouble, problem. Chomaj lage’m lan
blèg My unemployment is causing me trouble.
blende vt To fill up s.o. with, to give plenty.
M’blende’l ak kou I beat the hell out of him. Li
blende ak lajan He is filthy rich.
blenm, blèm attrib 1. Pale, colorless. 2. Boring,
simple, uninteresting. Ou fè tròp tenten, ou blenm
You do too many foolish things; you’re boring.
blero a, bleyo a, bliyo a n Shaving brush.
27 B
blese vt To wound, to hurt, to injure; to offend;
to wound one’s self. Nan tranbleman tè ki fèt la,
gen twa mil moun ki blese As a result of the
earthquake, 3000 persons were wounded.
blesi a n Wound, sore, injury.
blije V oblije
bliyadò a n Forgetful person.
bliye, bilye (pop) vt To forget. Bliye kò: To
forget one’s self. Se sa’m bliye m’pa di’l I let him
have it. I gave him hell. I didn’t mince my words.
bliyo V blero
blo a n Blow*, hit.
blòf la n Bluff*.
blofe vt To bluff*.
blofè a n Bluffer*.
blòk la n Block*, natural stone block; building
material, block*, such as cinder block. Blòk
glas Block of ice. M’chita sou yon blòk I’m cool as
a cucumber. I’m not worried. I keep calm. Also
used in the meaning of ‘to form a solid block’;
‘blockade’; ‘street block’, square. Blòk motè Motor
block. Blòk bwa Block of wood. Also: madriye.
An blòk Wholesale. Blòk jòn Yellow pad (writing
paper).
bloke vt To block* (in soccer game); to hamper;
to stop.
blokis la n 1. Roadblock*. Gen blokis, m’pa kab
al Kalfou There is a roadblock; I can’t go to Kalfou.
2. Problem, hindrance.
blon an n A blond* (man).
blond lan n A blond* (woman).
blouz la n Blouse*; doctor’s uniform.
blouzon an n Shirt (for children).
bo 1
vt To kiss, to embrace. Youn bo lòt They
kiss(ed) each other. vi To kiss. Also a noun: a
kiss.
bo 2
adv In vain, in spite of. Yo bo di’l They told
him in vain (a thousand times). Li bo eseye Try as
he may.
bò 1
prep Is used as a preposition, an adverb,
etc. As a preposition, it means close to, by,
beside, near. It is often associated with the word
‘kote’ and the complete preposition is ‘bò kote’
or ‘bò kot’. Here are some expressions with the
word ‘bò’. Abò, a bò On board*, aboard*. Bò isi,
bò isit, bò isi a, bò isit la Here, this way, on this
side. Bò la a Over here. M’pa sou bò ou I ain’t
bothered about you. Lòt bò, lòt bò a Yonder, over
there, on the other side. Kibò ou rete? Where do
you live?
bò a 2
n Side, edge; half (of an object); part,
section.
bòbèch la n Candle ring, socket. Lanp bòbèch,
lanp tèt bòbèch Type of oil lamp.
bobin nan n Spool, reel of thread. Cf. bobbin*.
Se bobin (or) bobin suif Baloney! It’s a lot of
nonsense.
bobinay la n Coil.
bobinen vt To wind on (a spool), to string, to
string along.
bobis adv Mache bobis To swing one’s body about;
to truck; to strut.
bobo 1
vt To kiss (rare). Yon gèp panyòl bobo’l
lan dyòl A wasp kissed him on the mouth (stung
him).
bobo a 2
n 1. Bruise (infantile). Place where
one has a bump. 2. Bobo bannann V pòpòt
bannann. 3. V bòbòt.
bobori a n Type of thick cassava biscuit made
from manioc.
bòbòt la, bobo a n 1. Natura muliebris, female
genitals, cunt. 2. Small roll (bread).
bòbòy attrib Somewhat stupid, imbecile.
bòday la n Edge, rim, border*.
bode V brode
bòde vi To approach, to come near, to dock, to
board*. Pa bòde Don’t come near me. vt To
provide with a border*, i.e. adding a lace border
to a dress.
bòdè V bròdè
bòdèl la n Brothel*.
bòdi a n 1. Edge (of a lake). 2. Border (of a
dress). Fè bòdi To put on a border.
bòdmè a n 1. Waterfront, seashore. An’n al pran
bon van bòdmè Let’s go get some fresh air at the
seashore. 2. Downtown.
bòdro a, bòdo a n Bordereau*, bill (a detailed
memorandum), invoice.
bòdyò V abòdyò
bofi a, bofis la n 1. Son-in-law. 2. Stepson.
bofijefra, bofi jefra Viv sou bofijefra To be a
sponger.
bofrè a, bòfrè a n Brother-in-law. (fam) bòf.
boga V bonga
bogi a n Horse-drawn carriage for passengers.
Buggy*. One or two may still be seen in Port-au-
Prince.
bogota a n Any old car, rattle-trap; any piece of
worn out junk; old jalopy, old hag, lemon (slang).
boh interj Bang!
B 28
bòk la n 1. (bot) Peduncle, tail (of a banana
stalk). 2. The entire apparatus for administering
an enema.
bokal la n Jar.
bòkè a, bòkyè a n Hardening of saliva at the
corners of the mouth. It may result from cheilosis,
an abnormal condition of the lips, characterized
by scaling of the surface and fissuring of the
corners of the mouth. FRANKE-TIENNE/B-55:
Li tounen yon albinòs je veron, dyòl bòkyè...
bòkèt Klou bòkèt Nail with a large head.
bokit la n Metal or wooden bucket*, pail. Yon
bokit... A lot of..., many
boko a n Cask. Yo achte yon boko lanmori They
bought a barrel of codfish.
bòkò a n Witchdoctor, medicine man, sorcerer.
bòkote, bòkot, bò kote, bò kot prep Near, beside,
close to; in comparison with. PRESSOIR-21: Li
vole bòkote lanp la It flew close to the lamp. V bò.
bokou adv Much. It is heard in the expression:
Mèsi bokou Thank you very much. CELESTINMEGIE/3-43:
Wi, mis, mèsi bokou.
bòks la n Boxing*. Yon match bòks A boxing
match.
bokse, boske vi To box*, to fight.
boksè a n Boxer*.
bòkyè V bòkè
bòl 1
attrib Bald*. Poul bòl Chicken with plucked
tail. Tèt bòl Bald-headed.
bòl la 2
n Bowl*, basin. Li nan bòl li He is in his
own ball park; things are looking good for him. Plen
bòl To give to the fullest. FRANKETIENNE/B-41:
Plen bòl mwen ra dyòl.
bolero a n 1. Bolero* (a dance). 2. Small women’s
jacket.
bòlèt la n Lottery. Numbers game. Sp. boleta.
bolid la, bolit la n 1. Bolid*, fireball. 2. A
genius, a brillant person.
bolin nan n Revolver.
bolit la n Jargon used by young people (In the
city of Gonaïves).
boliva a n Bag, sack (straw).
boloze vi To joke, to babble, to ramble. (syn)
ranse.
bòlwivèl la n Bolwivel*. This insect is found
mostly in cotton bushes.
bòmdevi a, bonmdevi a n A medicinal plant.
bon an 1
n Leap, jump.
bon, bòn 2
attrib (The form bòn is used with
some Creole words which are feminine in
French). Good, fine, proper, suitable; well. Santi
bon To smell good. Se bon pou li It serves him
right. Bon lan bouch Delicious, yummy. A kwa
bon? What’s the use? Pi bon Better, best. (‘Miyò’
is somewhat antiquated). Tout bon In all seriousness,
in earnest. Si’l bon, di’l bon Isn’t that
wonderful. Bon kou Many, a lot, much. Te gen
bon kou moun There were a lot of people. Li se bon
jan kriminèl He is a real criminal. Se bon It
serves you right (It is also used to express a
slight threat). Bon mache Cheap. Bòn chans
Good luck. Li se yon bòn pèsòn She is a good
person. Bòn ane Happy new year. Yon bòn fwa
Once and for all. Bòn konduit Good behavior. ‘Bon
nouvèl’: Name of a monthly publication in Haiti of
35,000. Has been in existence for four decades;
entirely in Creole, directed by Pè Joris Ceuppens
until his death in 1983 and continues till today.
bòn nan 1
n Milestone, boundary, marker.
bòn nan 2
n Maid, servant girl; nursemaid (of
babies).
bònatoufè a n All purpose maid.
bònatout la n All purpose material widely used
for making women’s clothes.
bonbade vt To bomb*, to shell.
bonbe, rebonbe vt To puff out, to distend (one’s
chest, etc.). Msye bonbe do’l pou’l pote chay la
This man arches his back in order to carry the load.
bonbon an n Cake, candy, cupcake, cookies,
sweet rolls, goodies, bonbons*.
bonbon siro a n Type of cake that looks like
gingerbread .
bonbonfle 1
attrib Puffed (up), swollen.
bonbonfle a 2
n 1. An insect that stings. 2. A
worthless person. FRANKETIENNE/P-14: Mwen
grandi lan yon katye bade ak bigay, bonbonfle.
bonbonyen an n A medicinal plant. Lantana
aculeata L.
bonda V bounda
bondans Yon bondans A lot of, an abundance* of.
bonde attrib Filled with, full of; full to overflowing.
bondi vi To jump. Bondi sou To jump upon.
Bondye, Bongye, Dye n God, deity. Si Bondye
vle God willing. Pa mande Bondye God forbid.
Bondye fè... Thank God...
bòne vt 1. To mark the boundary. To limit.
2. Restricted (limited in intelligence).
bonè a 1
n Luck, fortune, happiness.
bonè a, bonèt la, bonnèt la 2
n Bonnet*.
bonè, bonnè, bònè 3
adv Early. L’a vini madi
maten bonè He will come early Tuesday morning.
bònfwa a n Goodwill. CELESTIN-MEGIE/2-118:
Fòk...ou al prouve ou genyen plis bòn-fwa.
29 B
bonga a, boga n A toad.
bonis la, bonnis la n Bonus*.
bonit la, bonnit la n Frigate mackerel (a fish).
Auxis thazard.
bonjou n Good morning. Greetings. Di’l bonjou
pou mwen Give my regards to him (or) Say ‘hello’
to him.
bonjou parenn n Said in describing clothes,
hats or shoes that do not fit.
bonkè a n Kind heart, compassion.
bonkou, bon kou adv Much, plenty, quite a few.
Li gen bonkou lajan He has a lot of money.
bonm nan n 1. Bomb*. 2. Cooking pot.
bonmache, bon mache, bòmache attrib Cheap
(inexpensive).
bonmas la n Good people. Dyab mele ak bonmas
All types of people, good and bad.
bonmaten, bon maten adv Early in the morning.
bonmen V anbonmen
bonnanj la, bònanj la n Common sense.
bonnas attrib Overly good, naive.
bonnonm nan, bonòm nan n Person, man,
fellow.
bonsans la, bon sans la n Common sense*,
intelligence. Kote bonsans ou? Where is your
common sense?
bonswa interj Good afternoon, good evening,
good night.
bonswadanm nan n 1. Last dance of a ball.
2. (fig) Very late in a procedure. FRANKETIENNE/D-178:
N’ap regle sa menm lan bon-
swadanm.
bonte a n Kindness, goodness. Nonm nan pa
rich, men se bonte’l ki konte The man is not rich,
but his kindness is overwhelming.
bònvolonte a, bòn volonte a n Willingness.
bonvoulwa a, bon voulwa a n Good disposition.
Benevolence. M’pat oblije fè sa pou ou, se bon
voulwa’m si’m fè’l I was not obliged to do that for
you; I did it only out of the goodness of my heart.
bopè a, bòpè a n Father-in-law; stepfather.
boròm nan, bòwòm nan n Superman, bouncer
(pej). In some secret societies, e.g. the ‘sanpwèl’,
the person whose job it is to put to test new
members.
bòs la 1
n (antiq) Buggy.
bòs la 2
n Hump, bump.
bòs la 3
n 1. Boss*, foreman, headman, master
(esp) of a trade, manager, expert. 2. Hired
hand, workman. Bòs tayè Tailor. Bòs pent House
painter. Bòs kòdonye Shoemaker. Bòs ebenis Joiner
(who works on furniture), carpenter, cabinet maker.
bosal 1
attrib Wild, untamed; not yet broken in
(of animals); rough and tough, uncouth; said
also of a person who has not been baptized.
bosal la 2
n The bridle (bit) with blinkers with
which to train young horses.
bosi 1
attrib Hunchback.
bosi a 2
n Hunchback.
boske V bokse 1
boske V bouske 2
bosko Hunchback(ed). Ou vle geri bosko ou sou
mwen You want to find solace in s.o. else. You
want to become well-off at my expense.
bòt la 1
n Boot*. Also: bòt soulye.
bòt la 2
n Blow, thrust, hit. Bòt salyè Blow on the
shoulder blade.
botay V brotay
bote a n Beauty*; a handsome person. Se yon
bote She is a beauty. Trou bote Dimple.
botin nan n Small boot*.
boubou attrib 1. Timid. 2. Mute (in Jérémie)
V bèbè.
bouboun nan n 1. Bottom, end, buttocks. 2. Vagina.
(usu) Refers to the genitals of a young
girl.
boubout la n Girl friend; darling, beloved.
boubouy la, bouboul la n Soursop juice.
boubyay la n Any mixed up matter.
bouch la n Mouth, spout. V dyòl. Bouchdensandi
Fire-plug. Bouch latrin Toilet seat. Pe bouch ou
Shut up. Machin nan chavire bouch anba lan ravin
nan The car turned upside down in the ravine,
with the four wheels in the air. Bouch mwen chape
It escaped me; it slipped out; I said it unintentionally.
Gen bouch (or) Gen lang To have a foul tongue
(to speak evil about people). Bouch be Baffled,
surprised. Mete bouch, foure bouch To add one’s
two cents’ worth, one’s personal opinion; to meddle.
Fè bouch yon moun To coach s.o., to tell him what
to say to a third party. Pa ban’m bouch (or) Pa
mete bouch ou sou mwen Don’t mention such evil
things, they might happen (to me). Ou pat ban’m
bouch pou’m pale You didn’t give me time to speak.
Sa’k rive a si grav m’pa gen bouch pou’m pale
What happened is so serious I can’t even talk about
it. Fè kwa sou bouch ou Swear never to say it
again. Li gen bouch dous He is very convincing;
he can sweet-talk you. Li gen bouch alèlè He is
indiscreet, he can’t keep a secret. He’s a blabbermouth.
bouche 1
vt To clog, to stop up; to block (the
view), to hide. PRESSOIR-9: An giz yo bouche
solèy la Instead of blocking the sun. Li bouche
figi’l ak men’l He hides his face in his hands.
B 30
bouche a 2
n Mouthful. Li fè yon sèl bouche avè’l
He made one mouthful out of it.
bouche a 3
n Butcher*.
bouchi V lanbouchi
bouchon an n Stopper, bottle cap. Bouchon
radyatè Radiator cap.
bouchonnen vt To close with a stopper, a cork
or a cap.
bouchri a n Slaughterhouse.
bouda V bounda
boude vi To pout, to be sulky; to be discontented.
bouden an n 1. Arse. Bouden’m ap rache anba
travay I’m exhausted from overwork. 2. The insides
of the stomach, of a fruit. 3. Type of blood
sausage. 4. Lie, trickery, falsehood; fib, white
lie. M’pap pran bouden sa a I won’t swallow that.
Bay bouden To lie, to deceive; to tell fibs. Bouden
gri 1. A lie. 2. A despicable person. Espès bouden
gri You! Good for nothing!
boudich la n Buttocks.
boudonnen vi To buzz.
boufi attrib Swollen, puffed up.
boug la, bouk la n Bugger*, fellow, guy, chap.
bougalong nan n Type of venereal disease causing
a constant drip.
bougenvilye a n (bot) Bougainvillea*. Named
after L. A. de Bougainville (1789).
bougon an n Corn cob.
bougonnen 1
vi To mumble, to grumble (protest)
under one’s breath.
bougonnen an 2
n Sweet ball of popcorn (like a
round mass of candy with syrup). Also called:
bougonnen granmoun, bougonnen mayi.
bougrès la n Girl. Cf. Boug la.
bouje vi To move, to shift; to budge*. Pa bouje
Stand still.
bouji a n 1. Candle. V balèn, chandèl. Limyè
bouji Candlelight. 2. Spark plug.
boujonnen vi To sprout, to bud, to shoot out,
to burgeon*.
boujwa a (m), boujwaz la (fem) n Aristocrat. Cf
Bourgeois*. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-25: Gan
boujwaz k’ap monte nan machin ou There are aristocrat
women getting into your car.
boujwazi a n Aristocracy.
bouk 1
Piman bouk, a very pungent hot pepper.
bouk la 2
n Billy-goat. Santi bouk To stink like a
goat. Also: bouk kabrit, mal kabrit. Cf. E. buck*.
bouk la 3
n Buckle*, curl, ringlet. Boukdorèy la
Ear-ring.
bouk la 4
n Village, bourg*.
boukan an, boukandife a n Outdoor open fire
of twigs, etc.; barbecue (pit). Formerly temporary
quarters for buccaneers*.
boukannen vt To roast (strips of meat, corn,
etc.) on an open fire, to barbecue, to grill. V kankannen.
Je boukannen Eye without eyelashes. Mayi
boukannen Roast corn.
boukantay la n Exchange, barter, swap. Cf. tròk.
boukante vt To exchange, to swap.
boukara a n Rocky soil.
bouke 1
attrib Tired, wearied, fatigued, pooped
(out). Li bouke ak fanm sa a He’s tired of (fed
up with) that woman.
bouke 2
Stop...(Imperative). Bouke pale moun
mal Stop talking bad about people. Bouke rele Stop
shouting.
bouke a 3
n Bunch of flowers, bouquet*.
boukèt la n Group, gathering, clump. Boukèt
raje (ou) touf raje Small grove.
bouki n Bouki, the name of a legendary stupid,
foolish person in Haitian folklore. Any stupid
person can be called ‘bouki’.
boukle 1
vt To buckle*; to clasp, to curl (hair).
Nou nan tan di, nou fèt pou boukle ren nou We’re
going through difficult times; we have to tighten our
belts. Also: mare ren nou.
boukle 2
attrib Sterile, barren. Kabrit la boukle
The goat cannot bear young.
bouklèt la n Small curl (of hair).
boukman n Chèfboukman: the local representative
of a political candidate.
boul la n Ball* (toy; round object); pimple,
boil, bump; clot; lump. Labouyi a boulboul The
porridge is full of clots. Boul grès Grease bubble.
Boul lasi Wax bubble. Boul nan do Bump on the
back. Boul san Blood clot.
boula a n The smallest drum of the rada group
of drums. Boule boula ou Do your thing. Ban’m
boula ou (or) Kouman w’ap boule? How are
you?
boulanje a n Baker.
boulanjri a n Bakery.
boulatcha Anboulatcha Troubled.
boulay la n 1. Each round (match) of a cock
fight. 2. Odd job (DYESIFÒ).
boulboul attrib Lumpy (food). Labouyi a boulboul
The porridge is lumpy.
bouldimas V boulmas
bouldozè a n Bulldozer*.
31 B
boule, brile vt To burn, to consume. vi To
blow out (a bulb); to flunk an examination; to
exert oneself; to get burned; to burn up; to do
one’s thing; to get along; to deal (with). Examples
and expressions: Alkòl sou blesi boule On a
wound, alcohol stings. Kay mwen pran dife, li
boule My house caught on fire and burned down.
Kouman madanm ou ap boule avè’w? How is madame
treating you? Fè ti dife boule To incite two parties
to fight. Boule boule’w Do your thing. Boule zen
‘Burning the pot’; the name of a ritual in which
the ‘hounsi’ is elevated to the rank of ‘kanzo’
(COURLANDER).
boulèt la n 1. Cannon ball. 2. Meat ball. 3. Spitball
(paper).
boulin nan n Great speed, velocity. FARDIN-17:
Yo ale yo tounen tout boulin They’re going and
coming as fast as possible. Li pete yon boulin He
dashed out.
boulmas la, bouldimas la n Type of medicinal
plant. Rhoeo discolor.
boulòk la, laboulòk n An unsatisfactory, confused
explanation.
boulon an n Bolt, pin. Sere boulon To tighten a
bolt. (fig) To clamp down (on someone).
boulonnen vt To bolt, to pin.
boulpik la n 1. Main marble used in a marble
game. 2. One’s preference, passion, thing, love.
boulsenlo a n Type of hard candy.
boulva a n 1. Boulevard* (street). 2. Encounter,
attack between two game cocks.
boulvari a, bouvari a n 1. Storm, a big wind
resembling a small cyclone that rises suddenly.
2. Tumult, raucous.
boulvès la n Problem, trouble, difficulty. An
boulvès Troubled, upside down. Bay boulvès To
bother, to pester.
boulvèse vt To upset, to turn upside down, to
turn over.
boum interj Boum!
boumba a n Canoe carved out of a tree-trunk.
Mwen nan boumba I’m in a hull of a boat. I’m in
trouble.
bounda a, bonda a, bouda a n Buttocks, arse,
ass, rectum, the behind, rear, bottom.
V bouboun. Bounda ouvè Without limit, all the
way. Tou sa se bounda nini It’s a lot of nonsence.
Bouda’l ron, li vle pete kare He wants to swallow
more than he can chew. He wants to go beyond his
limits.
bourad la n Push, shove, thrust; boost.
bourade vt To push, to shove. Li bourade do’m
He shoved me on the back.
bourara a n Raucous, noise.
bouras la n Gust. Bouras van Gust of wind.
boure 1
vt To stuff; to overwhelm (with insults),
to scold.
boure 2
vi To stuff one’s self with food.
bourèt la n Wheel-barrow.
bouretye a n Person who pulls carts for a living.
bourik la n 1. Donkey, burro*. 2. Card game.
3. Common, clumsy, vulgar, gruff, discourteous
person. Mal bourik Jackass. Manman bourik
(or) femèl bourik She-ass, jenny ass. Ti bourik
Foal of an ass. Li bourik ak kat las He lost
although he had all four aces; he failed completely.
bourike vi To work like a slave (or) a horse.
bouro a n Hangman, executioner; bad, cruel
man, torturer. Dwèt bouro Index finger. Cf Dwèt
jouda.
bous la n 1. Pocket book, purse, wallet. 2. Type
of fish with a rugged skin. Balistas vetula. 3. Scholarship
(study award).
bousay la, brousay la n Brushwood*, underbrush*.
bouse a n Small inside pocket in the front of the
trousers. Cf. E. Gusset.
bouskay la n Research, search.
bouske, boske vt To look for, to seek. Bouske
kont To look for trouble, to provoke a quarrel.
V chèche. Cf. Sp. buscar.
bouskile vt To shove, to hussle.
bousòl la 1
n Compass with magnetic needle.
bousòl la 2
n Blister, pimple, tiny skin excrescence.
Papule, pustule. Bousòl leve sou li; li te touche
lagratèl Little pimples were sprouting on him. He
had touched poison ivy.
bousoufle attrib Swollen, puffed out, bloated.
boustabak la n 1. Type of black-bird, only larger
and with curved beak. Crotophaga ani. It is not
edible. 2. Type of fish. Prionodes tabacarius.
boustifay la n Food, huge meal.
boustifaye vi To be on a binge, to have a huge
meal.
bousye a n Fellow, i.e. recipient of a fellowship.
V bous.
bout la n 1. End, extremity, edge. Bout an bout
End to end. Bout pou bout Finally. 2. Dispute,
quarrel. Yè m’te fè yon bout ak Pyè Yesterday, I
had a row with Peter. 3. Bit (piece). Yon bout
kouto A short knife. 4. Stump (arm, etc.). 5. Character.
M’konn bout li I know his ways, how he
acts. I know how to deal with him. 6. Ou bout (or)
Ou fin bout Now you’ve reached your limit; that’s
enough for you. Li fè yon bon bout tan ap pale
avè’m He talked to me for a long time. Lwaye a
bout The rent is due. Nèg sa a se yon bout di This
man is hard to deal with; he is a hard nut to crack.
B 32
boute, broute vi To graze, to nibble.
boutèy la n Bottle*.
bouti a 1
n Cutting (from a plant).
bouti V abouti 2
boutik la n Shop, boutique*, general store. A
large store is a magazen.
bouton an n 1. Button*. 2. Boil, sore, pimple.
3. Bud. Bouton tete Nipple. Bouton presyon Snap,
snap fastener.
boutonnen vt To button*. vi To sprout (buds).
V boujonnen.
boutonnyè a, boutonyè a n Button-hole*.
bouva a n A young bull (ox), calf.
bouya a, brouya a n Fog.
bouyay la, brouyay la n 1. Predicament, difficulty,
trouble. Li te trè byen men yo lage li nan bouyay
He was all right, but they put him in a lot of trouble.
2. Interference (static); noise.
bouye vt To confuse, to mix up, to embroil*.
W’ap bouye’m You are confusing me.
bouyi 1
vt To boil*. Bouyi dlo To boil water. vi
To boil. Dlo bouyi vit Water boils fast. To
rumble (stomach).
bouyi a V labouyi 2
bouyivide a n Said of carelessly and hastily
prepared food.
bouyon an 1
n Broth, soup (generally very thick,
with meat, plantains, yams, cresses, carrots, radishes,
etc.).
bouyon an 2
n Draft (rough). Elèv yo fè devwa
yo o bouyon anvan yo mete’l o pròp The students
make a rough draft of their homework before the
finished (good) copy.
bouyonnen vi To bubble (culin).
bouzen an n 1. Prostitute. 2. Loose woman,
one who goes after men. V arona.
bouziye vt To daub.
bouziyèt la, breziyèt la n Type of medicinal
plant. Comocladia glabra Spreng.
bow interj Bang!
bòy attrib One-eyed; blind.
boya a n Mason’s hawk (to carry mortar).
bòykote vt To boycott*.
boyo a, bwayo a n 1. Bowels, intestines, guts.
2. Courage, guts. 3. Type of cheap rubber shoes.
bòzò attrib Elegant. Fè bòzò To show off, to
parade.
bra 1
Variant of bwa. PAURIS-63: Seren pran zo
bra tèt pou piyay.
bra a 2
n Arm. Kase bra To discourage. Move
nouvèl sa a kase bra’m This terrible news put me
down.
brabako V babako
braban an n Cotton cloth (from Brabant*).
brade vt To clamp.
bradsi bradsou adv Arm in arm.
bragèt la, bwagèt la n Fly (of trousers).
brak, bwak attrib 1. Sour, unsweetened (enough),
insufficiently sweetened. Cf. E. brackish*. 2. Impatient,
gruff and of few words; laconic.
brake 1
vt To sweeten somewhat (e.g. coffee).
brake 2
vt To aim and point at. Li brake revòlvè
sou mwen He pointed a revolver at me. Brake ak
To meet, to bump into.
branch la n 1. Bough, branch* (tree), limb.
Yon branch cheve A single hair. 2. Specialty,
field.
branka a n Stretcher, litter. Cf sivyè.
brankèt la n Stand (vendor’s).
branl anbranl, an branl In motion, agitated.
brannen, brennen vt To move, to budge.
branrany, branhany attrib Sterile.
bras la, bwas la n Stroke (swimming); batch (of
mortar); span of the arm (measurement); fath-
om.
brasa a n Armband.
brase vt To stir, to mix. Brase afè To stir up
(handle) business. Brase kat yo byen Mix the cards
well. Brase mòtye a Mix the mortar.
brasèdafè a n Broker, wheeler-dealer. Cf. koutye.
brasle a n Bracelet*, armband, wristband.
braslemont la n Wrist-watch.
brasyè a, brasye a n Swaddling clothes with long
sleeves which are put on newborn babies.
brav attrib Valiant, brave*, courageous.
bravedanje To be brave*, audacious, fearless.
Ala moun bravedanje That person is really flirting
with danger.
bravo a n Bravo*, cheer, applause. Universally
used Italianism. Bat bravo To cheer, to applaud,
to agree, to clap (hands).
bravou a n Bravery*.
brè V bwè
breche attrib Notched. Kouto a te breche The
knife was notched.
brèf attrib Curt, rough, fiery. Nan pwen moun
brèf tankou’l No one snaps at you like that.
33 B
bren 1
attrib Brown*.
bren an, brenn nan, brin nan, fèbren 2
n Twilight.
Nou lan fèbren It’s dusk.
breng nan n Young man, young woman. Yon
gran breng konsa, l’ap aji tankou timoun That big
so-and-so is acting like a little child.
brenn nan, bwenn nan n Intelligence, brains*.
Se pou ou gen brenn pou ou fè travay sa a You must
have brains to do that work. Mete brenn sou ou Be
smart, go to it.
brennen V brannen
brenzeng, brennzeng, bwenzeng Sou brenzeng (or)
an brenzeng Irritated, exasperated, temperamental.
breson V bwason
brèt V bwat
brete V bwate
bretèl la n Suspenders.
breton an, breton mayi a 1
n A type of hard
candy similar to nougat or peanut taffy made of
pop-corn and sugar cane syrup.
breton V beton 2
brevay la n Beverage*.
brevè a n Diploma awarded for at least two
years beyond elementary school (brevè semp)
or three years (brevè siperyè). Ou se yon mantè,
m’ba’w brevè’w You are a master liar; I take my
hat off to you.
brevyè a n Breviary*.
brèz la n Merriment during a wake.
breziyèt la V bouziyèt
brezo a n Bow-tie (Also: rozèt).
bri a, brui a, bwi a n Noise, sound, uproar;
rumor. San bri san kont Without fuss or argument.
brid la n Bridle*, reins. Bridsoukou (or) Brid
sou kou Very fast, on the spot. Lage brid kenbe ke
(In a children’s game) Let go of the bridle, and
hold by the tail.
bride vt 1. To bridle*. 2. To hold in check, to
limit s.o.’s activities, to restrain.
briding, brinding vt To budge, to move.
bridj la n Bridge* (card game).
bridsoukou V brid
brigad la n Brigade*. Squad. Yon brigad A lot of.
brigan attrib Boisterous, disorderly. Bold, daring,
turbulent. n Woman chaser, scoundrel, rogue.
Cf. E. brigand.
briganday la n Disorder, confusion, riot; debauchery,
the fast life, prostitution, perversion.
FARDIN-12: Si tifi a tonbe lan briganday If the
girl became corrupted. 2. Noise made by children
while playing.
brigande vi To fool (play) around.
brigo a n Tiny mullusk.
brik la n Brick*, bar. Brik savon Bar of soap.
brikabrak la n Junk shop, pawn shop. Store
where every type of merchandise is sold. Bric a
brac*.
brikal la n Machete.
brikè a n (Cigarette) lighter.
brikouri a n Diarrhea.
brile V boule
brili a n Burn.
brimad la n Torment, trouble(s), misery.
brin attrib Brown (woman). (syn) brinèt.
brinèt la n Black skinned (brown) woman.
FARDIN-16: Vivan kon you souri brinèt As lively
(brilliant) as the smile of a brunette.
brini vt To darken.
bris la n Tens and aces in a card game called
‘bezig’. Konbyen bris ou fè? How many tens and
aces (briscole) do you have?
brisak la n Knapsack, bag.
briske vt To be very brusk* with someone, to cut
him off, for instance.
briskeman adv Suddenly.
brit attrib Crude, brute*.
brital attrib Violent, rough, brutal*, brute*, dangerous
(a curve, for instance).
briyan attrib Brilliant*, bright, intelligent.
briz la, labriz n Breeze*. Labriz vante tou le swa
There is a breeze every evening.
brize vt To break. (fig) kraze brize.
brizfè a n Destructive individual. A person who
can’t handle an object without ruining it.
bròch la n Brooch*.
broche a, brochèt la n Pike (fish). Centropomus
pectinatus.
bròd Fè bròd To be ostentatious, to show off, to
want to be catered to.
brode, bode vt To embroider*.
bròdè, bòdè attrib Chic, elegant, coquettish,
ostentatious. Fè bròdè To show off, to be ostentatious
(Not pej).
brodri a n Embroidery*.
bròkèt Klou bròkèt Tack (small nail).
B 34
bronchit la n Bronchitis*.
bronz la n Bronze*.
bròs la n Brush*. Bròs dan Tooth-brush. Bròs tèt
Hair-brush. Bròs rad Clothes-brush. Koupe cheve’m
a la bròs Give me a crew-cut.
brose vt To brush*.
brotay la, botay la n The act of changing residence,
moving, transporting. Bèt brotay Beast of burden.
L’ap fè brotay aswè a He is moving tonight.
brote, bote vt To carry, to take away. vi. To
move (to another house).
broute V boute
brouyay la V bouyay la
bwa a n 1. Wood, board, lumber, timber; woods,
forest, backwoods. 2. Penis, dick. 3. Beating.
4. V bra=arm. Examples and expressions: Li
pran bwa; li bwaze He ran away, he has taken to
the hills, he left in a hurry. ‘Bwa’ is also used in
the vocative in the meaning of ‘man’, ‘person’.
Bwa, kote ou prale? You there, where are you
going? Kase bwa nan zòrèy yon moun To whisper
sweet nothings into s.o.’s ear. Gro bwa Man of
importance. Rak bwa Thicket. Even a small forest.
Souch bwa Stump, log. Poud bwa Wood dust from
worm holes or termite holes. Ba li bwa Give it all
you got. Bat bwa Knock on wood. Bwa bale
Broomstick. Bwa dife Burning stick of wood. Bwa
tèt, zo bwa tèt Skull. Bwa kou, zo bwa kou Neck,
neck bone. Bay yon moun yon bwa jouman To
curse out s.o., to insult vehemently s.o. Bwa bourik
A bamboo trumpet, also known as vaccines (COURLANDER).
Bwa chabon Wood for making charcoal.
Bwa chapant Building timber. Bwa chèch Dry
wood V krik krak. Bwa chat (or) Bwachat In
‘al bwachat’, to die. Malad la al bwachat The sick
man died. Bwa dan Toothpick (It’s really a vine
which is used by peasants to clean their teeth).
Fè yon moun sèvi bwa dan To abuse s.o., to mistreat
s.o., to humiliate s.o. Bwa flo Light log out of
which rafts are made (V pipirit). Bwa fouye
(or) Bwa ron Dugout, canoe (A boat carved out
of a tree trunk). Bwa lan nen Card game in which
a pince-nez is placed as a punishment on the loser’s
nose or ear. Bwa linèt Frame of eye-glasses. Bwa
nèf Part of a field or forest where all plants have
been cut. Bwa pi ro (or) Bwa san fèy Tall and
skinny person.
bwa fè a n Ironwood, leadwood. Krugiodendron
ferreum (Vahl) Urban.
bwa fèblan an n (bot) Coffee colubrina. Colubrina
arborescens (Mill.) Sarg.
bwa imòtèl la n (bot) Coral tree, mountain
immortal. Micropteryx poeppigiana (Walp.) O.
F. Cook.
bwa kochon an n 1. A plant. Tetragastris balsamifera
(Sw) O. Ktze. 2. A beverage made of leaves
of that plant, crushed in ‘kleren’ and considered
an aphrodisiac. Such drinks are called ‘tranpe’.
bwa mabi a n Soldier wood. Colobrina reclinata
Brong.
bwa majò a n (bot) Piper aduncum L. Joint
wood.
bwa mit la n (bot) Spiceberry eugenia. Eugenia
rhombea, Krug. and Urb.
bwa pal la n Swamp bloodwood. Pterocarpus
officinalis Jacq.
bwa pen an n Pine* tree; brushwood, pine sticks
to start a fire (It’s a resinous wood that burns
easily and is used as a torch).
bwa pini a, bwa pine a n White-prickle. Martinique
prickly-ash. Fagara martinicensis Lam. This tree
is full of thorns.
bwa pwazon an n Bitterbush. Picramia pentandra
Sw. Other name: vanyan gason.
bwa rouj la n American muskwood. Guarea
trichilioides Sw.
bwa savonèt la n Wingleaf soapberry. Other
names: grenn kannik, savonèt peyi. Sapindus
saponaria L.
bwa sèd la n Cedar* tree.
bwa trompèt la n Trumpet tree. Cecropia peltata
L.
bwadchenn nan, bwatchenn n Oak. V chèn.
bwadenn franse a n Bay-rum tree. Pimenta racemosa
(Mill.) J.W. Moore.
bwadòm nan n (bot) West Indian elm.
bwason an, bweson an, breson an n Drink;
alcoholic beverage, alcohol. Li desann anpil bweson
yè swa; li vin sou He drank a lot last night; he
got drunk.
bwasonyè a, bwesonyè a, bresonyè a n Heavy
drinker, guzzler, drunkard. V tafyatè.
bwat la, bwèt la, brèt la n 1. Box. 2. Tin can
(milk, sardines, etc.). Bwat fèblan Tin can. Gro
bwat Crate. Bwat sekrè Piggy bank.
bwate, bwete, brete vi To limp, to be lame, to
hobble. Also: mache bwete.
bway la, ti bway la n Young boy*, lad.
bwaze, bweze vi To run away, to go into hiding,
to go to the forest (bwa). Souvan lè chat wè chen
li bwaze Often when a cat sees a dog, she runs
away.
bwe a, bre a n Buoy.
bwè, brè vt 1. To drink, to absorb. 2. To drink
alcoholic beverages. Li te konn bwè He used to
drink. 3. To kill (a fetus), to have an abortion.
4. To deceive. Examples and expressions: M’bwè
pwa (or) M’bwè’l I can’t guess it; I give up
(Phrase used in answering riddles). M’ta di’w
wi, men m’bwè’l pou ou I could give you an answer,
35 C
but I’ll swallow it for now. DYESIFÒ: Bwè yon
kafe anmè ak yon moun To have a showdown with
s.o., to take revenge.
bweson V bwason
bwesonyè V bwasonyè
bwèt V bwat
bwete V bwate
bwi V bri
bye a n Bias*, (slant) strip in dress making. An
bye On a bias.
byè a n Beer*.
byèl la n Connecting-rod (cars).
byen an 1
n 1. Property, possessions, wealth.
Moun rich gen anpil byen Rich people have plenty of
property. Byen san sue Something for nothing.
2. Real estate (lot, house, etc.). 3. Welfare, good.
Se pou pròp byen’w It’s for your own good (welfare).
byen, ben 2
adv & attrib. 1. Well, all right, very
well. 2. Good, fine; in good health. Li te malad,
men konnyea li byen He was sick, but now he is in
good health. 3. Quite, very, really. M’byen kontan
I am very happy. 4. On friendly terms, intimate.
An’n byen ankò Let’s make peace. Let’s be friends
again.
byenfè a n A good deed.
byenfetè a n Benefactor*
byenke conj Although, though. V kwak.
byennere attrib Carefree, blissful, free from (financial)
worries. Ou se yon byennere Sen Jan
Batis You’re a happy fellow. You have no worries.
byennerèz attrib Fortunate, happy. (Applied to
female beings).
byennèt la n Well being, welfare, prosperity.
The state of being well-off. Li nan byennèt li He
is well-off, things are looking good for him.
byeze vi To slant; to beat around the bush. Ase
byeze, di bagay la kareman Stop beating around the
bush; give me a straight answer. CELESTINMEGIE/2-114:
Yon moun ki pap byeze douvan
blan ameriken.
Ch
cha a n Float of Mardi Gras. Also: cha madigra.
chaben an, chablen an n A person with light
skin and kinky hair.
chabin nan n Creole girl, light skin with green
or blue eyes. Also: chabin dore.
chabon an n Charcoal, coal. Chabon dife Burning
coal.
chabrak la n 1. Saddle-cloth. 2. Old, rough
garment. 3. Gro chabrak Big shot, important person.
chache V chèche
chadap vi To shut up*. Chadap! Shut your
mouth!
chadèk la, chadèt la n Shaddock*, type of pearshaped
grapefruit, smaller at one end. Ci-trus
maxima Merr.
chadron an, chadon an n Sea urchin; thistle.
chagren an n Grief, sorrow, heartbreak. DEJEAN-
33: Nanm mwen chagren My heart is full of sorrow.
PRESSOIR-11: Lòt la di’l: chagren va tiye’m The
other one said to him: my heart is breaking. Bay
chagren To grieve.
chagrennman an n Sorrow, grief, heartbreak.
chaje vt 1. To load, to burden. Ou chaje bourik
la tròp You put too heavy a load on that donkey.
Chaje koule ba To be overloaded (Some people
say: chaje kou Legba) 2. To charge (a battery).
Chaje tròp To overcharge (a battery). 3. To attack
illegally in sports. 4. Chaje tèt To trouble (s.o.)
chajè a n Loader, hauler.
chajman an n Load, freight, cargo*, shipment
(goods shipped). Chajman tèt Worry, concern,
problem, bother.
chak indef adj, pron Each, every; each one, everyone,
everybody. Chak bagay Everything. Yo chak
Each of them. Chak fwa ou vini Each time you
come.
chal la n Shawl*. Anba chal Secretly, furtively.
Tanzantan, l’ap gade’m anba chal From time to time
she casts furtive glances at me.
chalan an n 1. Type of small boat without mast
or sail used for transfering passengers and merchandise
to a ship anchored in deep waters.
2. Police car used for transporting prisoners.
chalatan an n Charlatan*.
chalbari V chatbari
chalè a n Heat, warmth, temperature. An chalè
In heat. Bay chalè To kid, to tease amicably.
chalimo a n 1. Drinking straw. 2. Electric torch
for welding.
chalmonta a n A mistress who is in a lower
social level than her man.
chaloska n A character parading at carnival time
(Chales Oscar).
chalòt, echalòt, zechalòt n Shallot*, scallion.
chaloup la n Small boat, launch.
cham nan n 1. Charm*, grace. 2. Philter, love
potion given to a man by a woman in order to
C 36
make him become attached to her. Yo bay nèg
sa a yon cham This man has been bewitched, charmed.
chame vt To charm*, to seduce, to bewitch.
chamwa a n Chamois*, shammy* (material).
chan an n Field. Cf. E. Camp*. Yon chan mayi A
corn field. Also: Yon jaden mayi.
chanbranl lan, chanbrann nan n Frame (of
door).
chanbre a n Chambray* (a type of material to
make dresses).
chanbrèy la n Vulgar, loose woman; prostitute.
chanday la n Heavy sweater, pullover.
chandèl la n Candle*. M’ap mache nan fènwa;
mwen pa wè. Limen yon chandèl pou mwen I’ve
been walking in the dark. I can’t see; light a candle
for me. Ekonomi bout chandèl Paltry savings (practicing
economy by saving candle butts). Limyè chandèl
Candlelight. Bwa chandèl Torchwood, candlewood.
Amyris elemifera L.
chandelye a n 1. Candelabra*, chandelier*.
2. Type of cactus. V kandelab, rakèt.
chandriyon V sandriyon
chanje vi To change*, to vary. vt To change*;
to alter; to exchange*, to switch, to swap. Examples
and expressions: Chanje vitès To shift gears.
Chanje bèt To change pastures. Chanje plas To
change places, to move, to shift. Chanje lide To
chanje one’s mind. Chanje yon chèk (or) Touche
yon chèk To cash a check. Chanje po To shed one’s
skin.
chanjman an n Change* (alteration). Pa gen
okenn chanjman ki fèt nan projè a There were no
changes made in the project. Chanjmandè Change
of climate (scenery, milieu). Chanjman vitès
Change of gears (car).
chank la n Chancre*; skin ulcer, sore. Chankalèt
Cancer sore on children’s lips.
chankre vi To take a side route, away from the
straight path, to deviate. Li konn sa’l fè; li chankre
sou kote pou’m pa wè’l He knows what he has
done. He went sideways so I woudn’t see him. vt
To make a circular cut (sewing). 3. To trim the
hair on the forehead.
chanm nan n Room, bedroom. Yon bout chanm
kay One room appartment. Chanm gason Bachelor
appartment.
chanpay la n Champagne*.
chanpèt attrib Frivolous, loose (woman).
chanprèl, sanprèl, sanpwèl, chanpwèl n Secret
group of evil doers (folklore).
chanpyon an n Champion.*
chans la n Luck, piece of good luck; chance*.
Jou chans Lucky day. Li gen chans; li fèt ak kwaf
He is lucky (he was born that way). (Neap. E nato
cu la camisa). Se yon chans ou pran You are
taking a gamble. Fanm chans li A woman who
brings good luck to him.
chanson an n Song. Tout lajounen se yon sèl
chanson The whole day long, he talks about the
same thing.
chantay la, chantaj la n Blackmail, threat of
slander, bluff.
chante 1
vt & vi To sing, to chant*. Chante gam,
fè gam To boast.
chante a 2
n Song; singing; chirping, crowing.
chantè a n Singer.
chantiyon V echantiyon
chantonnen vt To saw, to cut out in profile.
chantrèl la n Female singer in a folkloric group
(rara, Vodou). Renn chantrèl (or) Larenn chantrèl
Leading singer in a folkloric singing group.
chantye a n Construction site, place where building
is in progress.
chanwan an n 1. Wood-owl. Lèd tankou chango
chanwan Ugly and dirty as the devil. 2. Secret
group of evil doers (folklore).
chany nan n 1. Shoe shine* (boy). Bwat chany
Shoe shine box. 2. Riffraff.
chap la n A brief absence, a short run (usually
surreptitiously). Yon ti chap se touche tounen It’s
touch and go.
chapant la n 1. Frame-work, timber, carpentry*.
2. (Boss) chapant: Carpenter*.
chapantye a n Carpenter*.
chapchawon, chapchawe n Filthy hangout, dirty
meeting place, skidrow, ‘across the tracks’.
chape vi 1. To slip away, to escape*. Li chape
apre krim nan He got away after the crime. 2. To
survive. M’te gen senk pitit; twa mouri, de chape I
had five children; three died, two survived. 3. Bouch
mwen chape It was just a slip of the tongue. I
didn’t mean to say it. vt To save. An nou chape
poul nou (or) An nou chape kò’n Let’s get away
from here. Let’s save our hide.
chapèl la n Chapel*, small church.
chapi V chèpi
chapit la n Chapter*.
chapitè a n Soothsayer, fortune teller. (Used
mostly in the North). V divinò.
chapito Yon chapito A lot of, many. V anpil.
chaple a, chaplèt la n Rosary. L’ap di chaple’l
He is saying the rosary. L’ap pase chaple He is
fingering the beads while saying the rosary.
chaplèt la n 1. Dandruff on children. 2. Cudgel,
club, bludgeon, shillelagh; big, knotted stick.
37 C
V gayak. Bwa chaplèt Tree the seeds of which are
used to make necklaces, rosaries. M’pase’l yon chaplèt
I hit him with a cudgel. Voye chaplèt To hit
(strike) repeatedly with a club.
chapo a n Hat, head-covering, cover; lampshade.
V konma. Chapo kasav Type of very thin straw
hat. Nan peyi san chapo Dead (i.e. in the country
where hats are no longer worn). San chapo Bareheaded.
Chapo ba! Hats off!
chaponnen vt To castrate.
charabia a n Jargon, gibberish, unintelligible
talk.
charanpyon V saranpyon
charanson an n Type of weevil.
charante vt To tease by mimicking. Cf chare.
chare vt To mimick, to ape, to mock; to make
fun of by imitating, aping. Cf. charante.
charèt la n Cart*.
chari a n Plow.
charitab attrib Charitable*.
charite 1
vt To give. Charite’m yon ti monnen
souple Please! Give me a little money.
charite a, la charite, charit 2
n Charity*, alms.
DEJEAN-27: Li tep mande charite He was begging.
(‘tep’ is used in the South for ‘tap’).
charony nan n Carrion*; nasty smell, stink.
charonyen, chawonyen vi To go to the filthy,
dangerous, and unorthodox places in search of
lowly pleasure. vt To annoy, to bother.
charye vt To cart*, to transport.
charyo a n Type of pushcart*.
chas V lachas
chase vt 1. To hunt. Nou te chase zwazo dimanch
pase Last Sunday, we went bird hunting. 2. To
chase* away, to expell, to eject, to put out. Ayisyen
te chase franse nan peyi a Haitians chased the
French from the country.
chasè a n Hunter.
chasi a n Chassis*.
chat la 1
n 1. Cat*. 2. (Fam.) Thief. 3. Genitals,
pussy. Examples and expressions: Manman chat
Pussy cat. Chat bwa or chat maron Wild cat. Se
chat ki tankou’l (or) Li vòlè plis pase chat He is
a real thief. Chat de pye (or) Chat dis dwèt
Thief, crook. Ti chat Kitten. M’pa wè chat I
didn’t see a soul. Chat boure A fat person. Li gen
je chat He has grey eyes. An chat pent Furtively.
Chat pran lang li The cat got his tongue. Achte
chat nan makout To buy a pig in a poke.
chat la 2
n A flat-bottomed boat.
chata vi To run away, to flee.
chatbari, chalbari, chalbarik n Mock serenade,
tin-kettle music, discordant noise. Rele (fè) chatbari
To razz, to make a racket in disapproval. Yo
rele chatbari dèyè kandida a, paske yo pa vle’l They
razzed the candidate because they don’t like him.
chatchoutè a, chapchoutè a n Sharpshooter*.
chatiman an n Punishment, chastisement*. Tout
moun ki fè krim, fòk yo jwenn chatiman All those
who commit crimes must be punished.
chato a n Castle*; also said of any huge mansion.
chatouye vt To trouble, to tickle (the mind).
chatouyèt, satouyèt, zatouyèt, chatiyèt vt To
tickle.
chatray la n Castration*. Sizo chatray Scissors
used in castrating animals.
chatre vt To castrate*.
chatrouj la, chatrouy la n Squid, calamary.
chatsourit V chòvsourit
chaviray la n A blow that knocks s.o. down.
chavire vt & vi To capsize, to topple, to turn
over; to knock over, to keel over, to overturn.
chawa a n Porter.
chawaye vi To carry away. To move (cart) furniture
to another house. V brote.
chay la, chaj la n Cargo*, load, freight; responsibility;
illegal attack (in sports). Yon chay A lot
of.
chayman an n Cargo*, load, freight.
chè 1
attrib 1. Costly, expensive, high priced.
Soulye yo chè The shoes are expensive. 2. Dear (as
in Dear Sir). Monchè, machè My dear. Chè sè,
ma chè sè My dear sister (nun). Liv sa a rele’m
chè mèt chè mètrès This book belongs to me only.
Chè tout mwen My darling.
chè a 2
n Pulpit. Pè a monte sou chè, l’al preche
The priest went on the pulpit to preach.
chè a, lachè 3
n Flesh. Chè lan nen Polyp in the
nose. Chè lan gòj Tonsilitis.
chèch V sèk
cheche V seche
chèche, chache vt 1. To look for, to search*.
M’ap chache liv mwen ki pèdi I’m looking for my
lost book. Chèche kont To look for a quarrel. 2. To
look up. Chèche mo sa a lan diksyonè a Look this
word up in the dictionary. 3. To try to. Chèche
mwayen ale Try and go. 4. Ale chache To fetch.
chechrès V sechrès
chèdepoul la n Goose bumps.
chèf la n Chief*, boss, headman, leader. Chèf
kanbiz V kanbiz. Fè chef To act as if one was a
boss.
C 38
chèfboukman V boukman
chèfseksyon an n Sheriff, chief of rural police.
chèk la n Check*, pay-check*. Chèk san provisyon
Bad check (insufficient funds).
cheka a n Government employee, one who receives
a monthly check*.
chela a n Bag with a shoulder strap.
chèlbè attrib Pedant, show-off, the great Shelby*.
Fè chèlbè To show off, to strut.
chelèn nan n Type of marble used in the game
of marbles.
chemen an, chimen an n Road, lane, path,
route, tract (lane), way. Chemen dekoupe Short
cut. Li fè chemen dekoupe pou li kab rive anvan’m
He took a short cut to get there before me. Gran
chimen Highway. Chemen rat Empty spots left on
the head as a result of a bad haircut. Chemen dlo
The water road by which a loa comes to and departs
from the scene of a service (COURLANDER).
cheminen an, chemine a n Chimney*.
chemiz la 1
n A folder for documents.
chemiz la, chimiz la, chimiy la 2
n Shirt, blouse.
chemizdenui an n Nightgown.
chemizèt la, chimizèt la n Undershirt.
chen an, chyen an n 1. Dog. 2. Servile person.
Ti chen Puppy. Mal chen Male dog. Femèl chen
(or) Manman chen Female dog, bitch. Yo kon
chen ak chat They are always fighting. Se chen
manje chen To be at each other’s throat. It’s a ‘dog
eat dog’ life. Se chen m’ap leve pou’m kouche I’m
really down and out. I don’t have a pot to piss in.
Fè chen lan pye yon moun To show s.o. excessive
attention in order to gain favors. Mèsi chen Said to
s.o. who forgets to say Thank you. Ou se zo bouke
chen You have no shame. Nothing can cure you.
Chen san mèt Loafer. Frèt kon nen chen Cold as
hell.
chèn nan, chenn nan n Oak. (usu) Bwadchenn
Oak wood. Pye bwadchenn Oak tree.
chenèt, chennèt Li gen dan chenèt He is gap
toothed.
cheni an, chini an n Caterpillar.
chenn nan n Chain*. Chenn kou Necklace. Bay
chenn To encourage (s.o.) to speak. Pran chenn To
create a fuss, to get angry.
chente vi To beg shamelessly (with baseness).
chèpi a, chapi a n Rags.
cheran attrib One who sells at high-prices, is
demanding (as far as price is concerned whether
for services or merchandise).
cheri n Beloved, darling. Cheri’m My sweet.
chetif attrib Emaciated, lean, weak.
chètout Chè tout mwen My one and only (endearing
term).
cheval V chwal
cheve a, chive a n Hair. Cheve filas Very fine,
thin hair. L’al koupe cheve’l He went to get a
haircut. Koupe cheve To give (or) to get a haircut.
Cf Fè tèt. Fo cheve Wig. Cheve grenn Kinky
hair. Cheve swa, cheve siro Straight hair.
chevi a n 1. Ankle. 2. Bolt.
chevon an n Wooden beam.
chevrèt la, chèvrèt la n Shrimp. V kribich.
chèy V chèz
chèz la, chèy la n Chair*, seat. M’ap ba ou sa
sou de chèz I’ll give you that in a jiffy, with ease.
Chèz long Lounging chair.
chi interj (onom) To shoo (chickens). Chi!
Poul, ale! Go away, chickens.
chich attrib Avaricious, stingy, penurious, tightfisted.
Li chich pase devan prizon (or) Li chich
pase kayimit He is really stingy.
chichadò, chicha attrib Stingy.
chichote vi To whisper.
chichotman an n Whispering.
chif la n Number, cipher*.
chifon an n Rag used to clean blackboards.
chifonnen vt 1. To wrinkle. 2. To trouble. Problèm
nan ap chifonnen’m That problem is bothering me.
chik 1
attrib Swell, chic*, elegant, smart.
chik la 2
n Chigger* (Tiny parasites that perforate
the skin under the foot and lay eggs).
chika a n A sharp movement of the pelvis while
dancing. It usually occurs in ‘bay chika.’
chikannen vt To bother, to annoy, to talk behind
s.o.’s back.
chikata a n A person whose feet are badly infected
by chiggers.
chike vi To chew tobaco.
chikin nan 1
n Jiggle, jerk.
chikin, tchikin 2
vt To rock backwards and forwards
(Shaking*). Chikin oto a, pouse’l ale, pouse’l vini
Rock the car, shake it back and forth.
chiklèt la n Chewing gum.
chiknòd la n Strike on the ear with the thumb
and the middle finger.
chikriti a n Foolishness, silliness, capriciousness.
Fè chikriti To act silly, capriciously.
chimè a n Bad humor, nervousness.
chimen V chemen
39 C
chimi 1
vi To shimmy* (car tires, e.g.).
chimi an 2
n Chemistry*.
Chin, Lachin n China*. Poul Chin Type of hen or
rooster.
chinen vt To beat s.o. soundly (in gambling or
games).
chini V cheni
chini do a n Area of the spine.
chinwa a n Chinese*, Chinaman*.
chipote vt To pester, to cause worry, to bother;
to bargain.
chire, dechire vt 1. To tear, to tear apart, into
pieces. 2. To flee, to leave. Li gen je chire He is
slant eyed (as the Asiatics). Yon ti chire A tiny
cut. Gran chire An ostentatious demeanor (behaviour).
Fè gran chire To play the big shot; to make a
lot of hullabaloo; to be a big show-off. Chire nat yon
moun To sock it to s.o., to let s.o. have it. Batiman
an ap chire dlo a The ship is going full speed
ahead. Chire pit To be at each other’s throat, to
quarrel.
chita vi 1. To sit (down), to take a seat. 2. To
set. 3. To fit, to set well on. 4. To be well off.
5. To stagnate (water). Chita dwat Sit up.
DEJEAN-81: Chita li chita, patizan’l yo vin jwenn
li As soon as he sat down, his followers and disciples
came to join him. Li san chita He is always on the
move. Ranje chita (or) Pare chita To build a
nest egg for the future.
chitatann, chita tann n Magical trap. Yo pare yon
‘chitatann’ pou li They set a magical trap for him.
chival V chwal
chive V cheve
chiya interj Exclamation of disgust, dislike, aversion,
coupled with anger and revolt. Shoot!
cho attrib 1. Warm, hot. 2. Eager, excited, teeming,
spirited. 3. Fickle. Ou cho pase leve danse You’re
in too big a hurry, too impatient. Ou tou cho, tou
bouke You are hot off the griddle, you’ve just arrived
and already you.... Ou cho pou... You are too
anxious to....
chòbòlòt la n Vagina.
choche V sòsye
chòchòl V chòvsourit
chòchye V sòsye
chode vt To scald*, to pour hot water on. Madanm
nan toujou chode poul avan li kuit li The woman
always pours hot water on a chicken before cooking
it. Grimo chode is applied to any light-skinned
person whose hair is yellowish like corn. Frui a
chode The fruit has become shriveled, wrinkled,
dried up by the sun before ripening. Chode tetin To
sterilize (boil) the nipple (of a baby’s bottle).
chodin nan n A ‘hot’ woman, supposedly a
sensuous one.
chodpiskòde a n A severe venereal disease.
chodyè a, chòdyè a, chògyè a n Kettle, (iron)
pot. Cf. E. Cauldron. Se vye chodyè ki fè pi bon
manje An old pot makes the best soup.
chofay la n Heating.
chofe vt To warm (up), to heat, to keep warm,
to reheat (food). Chofe tròp To overheat.
chofè a n Driver, chauffeur*. Chofè lanfè A crazy
driver, one who drives very fast.
chofi a n Small (red) pimples that appear on
the skin; heat rash.
chofrèt la n Chill, shivers; inflamation of the
lungs, pleurisy.
chòfsourit V chòvsourit
chògyè V chodyè
chòk la n Shock*.
chòk absòbè a, chòk la n Shock absorber*.
choke vt To shock*, to offend, to be shocked by
s.o.’s language, actions, or attitude.
chokola 1
attrib Brown.
chokola a 2
n Chocolate*, cocoa.
chomay la, chomaj la n 1. Unemployment.
2. Holiday.
chomè a n Jobless, unemployed person.
chomeko n Travay nan chomeko To be jobless,
unemployed.
chonje V sonje
chòp la n Shop* (store), workshop.
chose vi To wear shoes. Konbyen ou chose?
What size shoes do you wear?
chosèt la n Sock.
choson an n Booties (knitted baby shoes).
chòt la n 1. Shorts*. 2. Bathing suit (men’s).
3. Short* circuit.
chou 1
interj A call to shoo* away pigs and even
chickens. Chou kochon! Go away, pigs!
chou a 2
n 1. Cabbage. Chou karayib Colocasia
esculenta Scott. Chou palmis The heart of the royal
palm tree, which resembles in taste the heart of the
artichoke (Rostonea regia Cook) 2. Bun (hairdo).
Ti chou Darling.
chou karayib V karayib
chou palmis la n Heart of a palm.
D 40
choublak la n Shoeblack plant, China rose,
hibiscus. A showy, tall shrub with slighly fragrant,
crimson, pink, or white flowers. Hibiscus Rosasinensis,
L.
chouboulout n Darling, sweetheart.
chouch V souch
chouchoun V choun
chouchoutay la n Caress, cuddle, sweet nothing.
chouchoute vt 1. To shower with love. 2. To
spoil (a child)
chouflè a n Cauliflower*.
chouk la, souch la n Tree-stump; stub, stump
(of tooth); stub (of a check).
chouke attrib Rooted. Byen chouke Well rooted.
choukèt la n 1. Latch, stump. 2. A short person.
3. A small bench on which a woman lies when
delivering a baby.
choukètlarouze a, soukètlarouze a n The deputy,
the second in command to the ‘chèf seksyon’
(rural police officer).
Choukoun n Title of a poem written by the
Haitian poet Oswald Durand in 1883; it became
a song that was rendered in English as ‘Yellow
Bird’.
choumounou an n Dwarf.
choun nan, chouchoun nan n (euph) for
‘bouboun’.
choupèt la n Tuft, clump (of trees), cluster,
bunch. Choupèt kòk A clump of coconut palm
trees. 2. An endearing term like ‘kòkòt, chou,
cheri’.
chout la n Shoot* (kick in football or soccer).
Li gen chout serye He has a powerful shot. Li fè
yon chout He took a shot at the ball (with his foot).
chòv attrib Bald.
chòvsourit la, chòfsourit, chatsourit, chòchòl n
Bat (mammal).
chòy V chòz
chòz la, lachòz, chòy la n Thing. M’vin chèche ti
chòz la I came to get that little, you know what
(secret).
chuichui 1
vi To murmur, to whisper*.
chuichui, chwichwi, chuichuichui 2
n Whispering
(gossiping).
chwa a n Choice*.
chwal la, cheval la, chival la n Horse. Sou chwal
On horseback. Chwal angle A tall woman. Chwal
lanmè Seahorse. Chwal Bondye, chwal dyab, chwal
bwa Grasshopper. Monte chwal To ride a horse.
Chita a chwal sou yon mi To straddle a wall. Wete
chwal nan tèt yon moun To teach a person, to
educate him. Chwal also designates a person
who is possessed by a divinity in the Vodou cult.
chwale vi To ride as if on a horse. Chwale sou
bwa bale To ride a broomstick.
chwazi vt To choose*, to pick up.
chwe V echwe
chwèt la n 1. (Screech) owl. 2. An ugly, homely
person.
chwichwi V chuichui
chye vi To shit, to defecate, to have a bowel
movement.
chyen V chen
chyendan an, chendan n Couch-grass (bot).
Well known type of grass. Cynodon daktylon,
(L.) Pers.
chyente vi 1. To beg. 2. To lower one’s self in
order to obtain a favor.
D
dabò adv First, at first; in the first place.
dada a n (euph) for ‘bounda’ = buttocks. Yo
rete ak de po dada yo They were left with nothing;
they lost everything.
dage vt To prick.
daki Pale an daki To speak in parables.
dakò attrib 1. Agreed! 2. In agreement. Tout
moun te dakò pou vwayaje ansanm Everybody agreed
to travel together. M’pa dakò I disagree. 3. Properly,
correctly.
daktilograf la n Typist.
dal 1
Yon dal A great deal of, a lot of, many. Yon
dal moun A lot of people.
dal la 2
n Gutter; small ditch, drain, drainpipe,
trench, stone or cement slab covering a drain.
Dal planch Wooden form for pouring cement.
dalmari, dànmari n Santa maria* (tree), Brazilian
beauty-leaf (tree). Calophyllum brasiliense
Camb.
dam nan n 1. Lady, woman. Grand dam An
important lady. Pa vin fè grand dam ou avè’m
Don’t act with me as if you were an important lady.
2. Queen (cards).
damase a, danmase n Damask* material.
dame, danme vt To flatten (the earth) with the
bull-dozer.
damou, danmou attrib In love. Yo damou They
are in love with each other. Pòl damou pou Lwiz
Paul is in love with Louise. Mal damou Love
sickness.
41 D
damye a, danmye a n Checkers (game). Li fò
anpil nan damye He’s good at checkers.
dan n Tooth; claw. V kòk, krake, kraze, kras,
kròk, fobo, griyen, mal, mazora, rache, ratelye,
souch, sirèt. Kouto a gen dan The knife is notched,
jagged. Dan doukla Gag tooth, wolf’s tooth in
horses; one tooth on top of another. Dan koulèv la
Snake’s fangs. Sere dan ou pou pran kou Brace
yourself to receive the blows; resign yourself. Dan
krab Claws of a crab. Dan fouchèt Prongs of a
fork. Dan lèt The first teeth (which will fall to
make room for the second so-called permanent teeth);
milk teeth. Dan sajès Wisdom tooth. Also ‘dan
zòrèy’. Sou dan To be under pressure at a critical
moment; to have much to do. L’ap chanje dan His
teeth are falling and new ones are growing. Politik
gen dan Politics is hard and full of surprises. Lè
poul va fè dan Never, never (when a hen grows
teeth). Li gen dan gate He has bad (carious,
decayed) teeth. Dan yon angrenaj Teeth of a gear.
Genyen yon dan kont yon moun To have something
against s.o. Pou dan ri, pou dan Anri In vain, for
nothing. M’gen yon dan k’ap fè’m mal I have a
tooth that’s hurting me. M’gen mal dan I have a
toothache. Li gen yon dan ki souke He has a loose
tooth. Manje dan To grind one’s teeth, to swallow
one’s teeth (fig). Li tap manje dan’l konsa He was
raging with anger. M’tap manje dan’m pou’m pa
rele I swallowed my teeth so as not to cry out. Nan
dan ou To hell with you (usu) said in reaction to
an insult. Pe dan ou Shut up. Shut your mouth.
(This expression is stronger than the more common
Pe bouch ou, which is more like Keep
quiet). Pitit la ap fè dan The child is teething.
Rache dan To extract a tooth, to have a tooth pulled.
Bay gro kout dan To take big bites. Gro dan
Coarse tooth (of a comb). Ti dan Fine tooth (of a
comb). Dan devan Incisors.
Danbala n Vodou deity.
danble attrib Good, strong, straightforward, correct,
able, O.K. (pop).
dane vt To damn*.
danfans la n Bang(s).
dangoye vi 1. To walk with difficulty, slowly, to
limp, to hobble. 2. To get along. N’ap dangoye
We are getting along as well as we can.
danje a n Danger*, distress, peril. Mwen an
danje de mò I’m furious (upset).
danjere, danjre attrib Dangerous*, unsafe. (Sometimes
with a word that is feminine in French:
danjrèz).
danlemonnantye In the whole world.
danm nan n Stamper, grader (an implement).
dànmari V dalmari
danmen vt To stamp, to hammer upon.
danmjann nan, danmijann nan n Demijohn*.
danno a n Type of hard wood tree. It is often
used to make cudgels.
danre a n Commodity; food, (gen) vegetables,
coffee, bananas, etc., not meat.
dans la n Dance*. Also refers to a ritualistic
dance. FARDIN-16: Bèl kon yon dans fendane
Wonderful as a New Year’s ball (dance).
danse vi To dance*. PRESSOIR-46: Yo pran
danse They started to dance. Ou cho pase leve
danse You are too anxious and excited, calm down.
dansè a n Dancer*.
dansing nan n Cafe, dancing* hall.
dantèl la n Lace.
dantis la n Dentist*. Se pou m’al kay dantis jedi
Thursday, I have to go to the dentist’s (office).
dantisyon an n Teething.
dantle attrib Notched, dented*.
danvi attrib To have sexual desire (pop).
Daomen n Dahomey; type of dance rhythm.
daou V out
dapiyanp, dapiyan, dappiyanp Fè dapiyanp (sou)
To grab everything, to seize.
daplon attrib Steady, straight, even, fitting.
dapre prep According to; because of. Dapre
papa’m According to my father.
daprezavwa conj Because, since, for.
darati attrib (pej) Old. Refers to a person who is
older than he looks. The common expression
is: Darati kòn siye Old as an old ox (Derogatory,
not necessarily old). Cf. rasi.
daso Bay daso To take something away by deceiving
s.o. Pran daso To crash (a party). Yo pran fèt la
daso They crashed the party.
dasomann nan n Gate-crasher.
dat la 1
n 1. Date*, moment. Ki dat? When?
What date? Rete dat, fikse dat, pran dat To fix a
date for marriage. Se dat yo rive It’s a long time
since they arrived. 2. Menses. Li gen dat li She is
menstruating.
dat la 2
n A disease characterized by sores on the
skin.
dat la 3
n Date* (fruit). Phoenix dactylifera L.
davans adv In advance*.
davwa conj For, because, as, since. (pop) More
common is ‘paske’. Davwa’l fè sa yo pini’l Because
he did that they punish him.
dayè adv Besides, furthermore.
Dayiti Toma, Dayiti Tonma n Haiti. M’se moun
Dayiti Toma I am from Haiti. This expression is
frequently used.
D 42
dayiva a n Good swimmer. From E. diver*.
de 1
num Two. In liaison: dez; for instance dezè
two o’clock ; dezan two years ; dezòm two men ,
etc. De twa, dezoutwa Some, a few. L’al envite
dezoutwa moun He went to invite a few people. De
tan twa mouvman Fast, in a jiffy. De jou a viv
Only two days to live, life is short. Li pa fè ni de ni
twa He lost no time. He went straight ahead. The
only thing he did was...
de 2
prep Of, from, about. Youn de yo, youn nan
yo One of them. Li pale’m de yo He told me about
them.
de 3
Some. Gen de moun ki... There are some
people who.... Gen de jou... There are days when...
de a 4
n Thimble (to sew).
de a 5
n Canopy. Mache anba de To parade under
the canopy, to receive honors.
dè (rare) Some, a few. M’pa wè’l depi dè jou I
haven’t seen him for days.
de twa V dezoutwa
debaba vt 1. To devastate, to lay waste. 2. To
mow down.
debabouye vt To wash up s.o.
debagaje vt To move (out), to remove the contents
of a house.
debake vi To disembark*, to land, to go ashore.
vt To unload.
debale vt To unpack.
debalize vt To uproot everything from the ground.
Siklòn pase, li debalize tout bannann The cyclone
uprooted all the banana trees.
debanday la, debandad la n Confusion, disorder.
An debanday In disorder, in disorderly fashion,
helter-skelter. Tonbe nan debanday To become debauched,
to acquire loose morals.
debande vi To lose one’s erection.
debarase vt To rid (one’s self of), to free; to put
in order (a table, a room).
debare vt To clear (a road, etc.); to remove (an
obstacle); to move out of s.o.’s way or vision.
Debare’m pou’m kab wè Move out of my way, so
that I may see.
debat vi To struggle, to get along, to wrestle.
M’ap debat I’m getting along.
debinen vi To slander, to libel.
deblatere vi To talk badly behind s.o.’s back.
Medam yo ap deblatere sou do zanmi yo The women
gossipers are talking badly about their friends.
debleye vt To clear away, to shovel away. Debleye
tab la Clear the table.
deblozay la n Uproar; noise, fuss, tumult, brawl,
squabble, disorder.
debobinen vt To unreel, to unwind.
debòch la n Debauchery*. Katye sa a se yon zòn
debòch; pa pase ladan’l That’s a bad section (debauchery);
don’t go in there.
deboche vt To debauch*. Debauched*.
debòde vi 1. To run over, to overflow, to go
over-board* (with excitement), to get beside one’s
self, to lose one’s mind. 2. To protrude, to
overhang. Attrib: Daring, bold, impudent; enraged,
furious. V dechennen. Depi maten li
debòde, li vle joure Since this morning, she has
been dying to blow her top (fight verbally).
debòdman an n Extention of the roof that extends
beyond the wall. Eaves.
debon Something worthwhile. Fè debon To be
pregnant.
debonde vi To relieve one’s self by means of a
laxative; to empty.
debou, debout, doubout attrib Straight, standing,
upright, in good health. V kanpe. Chou-koun te
gen tete doubout Choukoun had two firm, pointed,
upright breasts.
debouche vt To unstop, to uncork, to open up
(a bottle); to unclog.
deboude vi To stop pouting, to stop frowning.
deboule vi To fall rolling like a ball; to run off.
deboulinen vi To tumble down.
deboulonnen vt To unbolt. Si ou pa deboulonnen
rou machin nan, ki jan pou ou fè leve pàn nan? If
you don’t remove the bolts of the wheel of the car,
how can you fix your flat tire?
deboundare attrib Bottomless.
deboure vt To remove the contents (clothes,
bags, etc.).
debouse vi To spend, to pay, to disburse*.
deboutonnen vt To unbutton*. Manje vant deboutonnen
To eat to one’s heart’s content and more.
debouya attrib Resourceful.
debouyay la n Savoir faire, tact (in getting out of
a difficult situation), resourcefulness.
debouye vpr To manage, to get along, to find a
way out. Mon chè, debouye ou pou marye ak fi a
My dear fellow, find a way to marry the girl.
debranche vt To prune, to trim, (lit) to cut off
excess branches from a tree.
debraye attrib Wide open, unbuttoned (shirt);
careless, untidy (about one’s clothing).
debreye vi To throw (or) to put out of gear.
debri a n Waste, junk, debris*, trash.
debride vt To unbridle*; to relieve. Dyòl debride
Free reign in speech, ‘unbridled lips’.
43 D
debyen attrib Good-natured, swell, proper. Li
debyen He is O.K..
dechaje vt 1. To dump, to unload. 2. To discharge*
(batteries, etc.). vi To ejaculate.
dechalbore vt To do damage, to demolish, to
handle violently.
dechanbrannen vt 1. To take away the frame of
a door. Pòt la dechanbrannen The frame of the
door is gone. 2. To cause s.o. to lose his bearings
(control).
dechay la n Sperm, discharge*.
dechè a n Waste, garbage.
dechennen vt To unchain*, to let loose. De-chennen
chen an Unchain the dog. Also: attrib Terrible,
furious. V debòde.
dechèpiye vt To shred to pieces, to tear apart;
(fig) to disparage.
dechifonnnen vt To smooth out.
dechifre vt To decipher*.
dechire, dekire vt To tear, to rip. V chire
dechiri a n A tear, a rip.
dechoukaj la, dechoukay la n 1. Uprooting.
2. This word took on a political meaning after
the fall of the Duvalier regime (Feb 1986).
dechouke vt To uproot, to dig out the root; to
uncover. This word took on a political meaning
after the fall of the Duvalier regime (Feb 86).
dechte vt To make thin, sickly.
dede a 1
n The old man.
dede V lavironn dede 2
deden an n Disdain*. Li gade yo ak deden He
eyed them disdainfully.
dedi 1
vt To contradict, to criticize. vi To
renege. Pa dedi Don’t renege.
dedi 2
V dedui
dedomaje, dedonmaje vt To indemnify, to pay
s.o. for damages.
dedoub la n Type of cassava biscuit made from
manioc. V bobori, bikwach.
dedui, dedi vt To deduct*.
dedye vt To dedicate*.
defale vi To tumble down.
defalke vt To extirpate, to take out; to strip.
defann vt 1. To forbid, to ban, to prohibit.
2. To defend*. Chak moun dwe defann peyi’l Every
person should defend his country. Avoka a pral
defann yon kriminèl The lawyer is about to put up a
defense for the criminal. Kouman ou ye? M’ap
defann mwen How are you? I am getting along.
defans la n 1. Prohibition. 2. Defense*, protection.
Pran defans yon moun To defend s.o.
defason In such a way that. Fè defason pou ou
vini a lè See that you come on time.
defè, defèt vt To undo. Li kab fè e defè He can
do and undo (He is all powerfull). Li defèt tout
travay moun yo te fè, paske li pat bon He undid all
the work that those people had done because it was
not good.
defen attrib Late (deceased). Cf. E. Defunct*.
Used only in phrases like Defen rwa Edip The
late king Oedipus. Li gen menm karaktè ak defen
papa’l He’s just like his late father used to be.
defèt1
vt To undo, to mess up. attrib Deteriotated,
become worse (in looks, health, etc.). ‘Messed
up’ (hair, clothes). Li vin isit la ak rad li tou
defèt He came here with his clothes all messed up.
defèt la 2
n Defeat*.
defi a n Challenge, defiance*. V dezafi. Mete
an defi, bay defi To defy*, to dare.
defigire vt To disfigure*, to deface.
defile 1
vi To parade, to march past.
defile 2
vt To dull (a knife).
defile a 3
n Parade.
definitif attrib Definite*. An definitif After all,
finally. Ban’m yon repons definitif Give me a
definite answer.
defisi a n Deficit*.
defo a n Fault, bad habit, failing, defect.
defòmasyon an n Deformation*.
defòme vt To put out of shape, to deform*, to
distort.
defonse vt 1. To break down, to batter, to break
in, to smash down so as to gain access to the
interior. 2. To remove the bottom.
defouke attrib Ripped at the crotch. Kanson’m
defouke My pants are ripped at the crotch.
defounen vt To take out of the oven.
defouni attrib Sparse (hair, etc.).
defrechi attrib Faded, wilted.
defresiye vt To disembowel.
defripe vt 1. To uncrumple, to smooth out.
2. To insult. 3. Frayed (ragged).
defroke attrib Outcast.
defwa, dèfwa At times. Gen defwa There are times
(when).
defyan attrib Defiant*, daring (rare and learned).
dega a 1
n Damage. Waste.
D 44
dega, dèzega 2
Mank dega Lack of respect. Manke
dega, manke dèsega To lack proper regard* for, to
be discourteous.
degagannen vt To attack, to grab by the throat.
Li mande’m lajan; m’pa ba li. Li vle degagannen’m
He asked me for money. I didn’t give him any. He
wanted to grab me by the throat.
degajan attrib Resourceful.
degaje vt To free, to release; to disengage*. vpr
To manage, to do well. Degaje’w Do your best.
Find a way out of your difficulty. Si ou pa degaje’w,
w’ap mouri If you don’t find a way out, you’re
going to die.
degaye vt To mess up, to put in disorder.
degenn nan n 1. Manner (style) of walking, term
which is used to describe mostly old persons.
Gade degenn tonton an Look at that old man’s gait
(antics). (Not pej, merely surprising). 2. Ways,
activities. Moun pa konn tout degenn ou People do
not know your hidden side.
degennen vt To unsheath.
degèpi vi To move out. Y’ap kraze kay la, yo
mande pou tout moun degèpi They’re going to tear
the house down, they asked (told) everyone to leave.
degi a, dyegi a n (A little) Extra, for good
measure; supplement. V. barad, ranje. M’achte,
li pa ban mwen degi I made a purchase, but he
didn’t give me anything for good measure.
degize vt To disguise*, to mask. Bal degize
Costume ball.
degizman an n Disguise*; costume.
degobe V degobye
degobyay la n Belching.
degobye, degobe vi To belch, to burp, to bring
up. Cf. gaz, rote.
degòje vt To cut the throat.
degonfle vt To deflate.
degonmen vi To detach (unglue), to come off.
V dekole, gonmen.
degou a n Loathing, aversion, disgust*. V de-
goutans.
degoudi vt To take off the chill or numbness.
Degoudi kò’w Stretch your legs.
degouspa vi To budge.
degout la n Drip. Twa degout Type of poison.
degoutan attrib Disgusting*.
degoutans la n Disgust*, aversion, loathing.
V degou.
degoute 1
vt To hate, to disgust*, to be disgusted*
with. Anpil moun degoute’l poutèt li pa serye Many
people dislike him, because he is not serious.
degoute, goute 2
vi To drip, to drain. V gout.
Kite rad la degoute Let the garment drip a while.
degraba Nan degraba Penniless.
degradan attrib Degrading*, sickening.
degrade vt 1. To demote, to downgrade, to degrade*,
to reduce in rank. Also: Vodou term.
degrape vt To pick fruit from bunches, to snatch.
degrate vt To weed, to scratch around.
degre a n 1. Degree*; extent; phase. Ki degre ou
rive nan leson pyano ou yo? How far have you
gotten with your piano lessons? 2. Charm, magical
power. Fè yon degre pou fanm nan akouche To
perform an incantation (ceremony, prayer) so that
the woman may deliver successfully.
degrengole, grengole vi To roll (tumble) all the
way down. Mango a tonbe; li degrengole nan ravin
nan The mango fell off the tree and rolled all the
way down to the ravine.
degrennen vt 1. To shell (corn), to pick. 2. To
break a bill (money). 3. To remove (or fall
out) one by one.
degrese vt To remove the fat, to slenderize.
V grese.
degriji vt To unpleat, to unwrinkle.
degrosi vt To refine, to become refined. Mal
degrosi Rough, still unrefined (countrified).
dehèl From English ‘What the hell!’ Sitiyasyon
dehèl! Situation? What ‘the hell’ are you talking
about?
deja, dija adv Already. M’manje deja, pa ban’m
ankò I’ve already eaten; don’t give me anymore.
dejene V dejnen
dejenere vi To degenerate*.
dejle Yon dejle A lot of.
dejnen, dejene 1
vi To eat breakfast.
dejnen an, dejene a, dejennen an 2
n Breakfast.
dejouke vi To come down from the roost.
dejwe vt To corrupt; to be morally degraded,
corrupted, played out. Lò ou bwè tròp tafya, ou
vin dejwe When you drink too much, you become
corrupted. You lose your will power.
dejwente vt To dislocate. Dislocated, disjointed*,
out of joint*. Jenou’l dejwente He twisted his
knee.
dèk V dèke
dekabès la n Term used in games (e.g. dominos).
In Spanish: dos cabezas.
dekachte vt To open up (a letter). V kachte.
45 D
dekage vt & vi To put a chair in its upright
position (after having leaned it backward against
a wall, a tree, etc.).
dekale vt To chip off, to peal off, to skin. Savon
sa a fè men’m dekale That soap made the skin come
off my hands.
dekalke vt To copy a drawing from a model.
dekalyon Yon dekalyon A great deal of, a great
many.
dekamèt la n Tape measure.
dekanpe vi To go away, to move away. V deplase.
Si ou pa dekanpe kounyeya, m’ap rele lapolis pou ou
If you don’t go away fast, I’m going to call the
police.
dekape vt To carve. To cut to pieces. Yo dekape
vyann bèf la, chak moun pran moso They cut up
the beef and everybody took a piece.
dekapotab attrib Convertible (car).
dekatiye vt To cut up, to prune; to break into
pieces.
dekatya vt To cut up, to break.
dekayèt la n Type of bean (Pwa dekayèt).
dèke, dèk conj phr As soon as.
dekilakèl V kilakèl
dekiprevyen The reason why, why, wherefore.
W’a di’m dekiprevyen You will tell me why.
dekire, dekwire vt To skin.
deklanche vt To activate, to start, to launch.
deklarasyon an n 1. Statement, declaration*.
2. Avowal of love. Anri fè Anèt deklarasyon Henry
declared his love to Annette. 3. Formal complaint
to the police.
deklare vt & vi To assert, to state, to declare*;
to testify (in court). Deklare entansyon To inform
the parents of your love for their daughter; to make a
formal declaration of marriage. Lapli deklare It
has started to rain.
deklete vt To open with a key. Deklete pòt la
Open the door.
dekloke vi To go out of joint, to sprain, to
disjoint (shoulder, etc.).
dekloure vt To pull out the nail; to become
unnailed.
dekochte vt To unhook and open (a door).
dekoke, dekroke vt To unhook. Li lè pou dekoke
pòtre a nan mi an It’s time to take down the picture
off the wall.
dekole vt To unglue, to detach itself from. V kole,
gonmen.
dekòlte 1
attrib Lewd, spicy, smutty; insolent,
shameless.
dekòlte 2
attrib With bare neck and shoulders.
dekòlte a 3
n Plunging neckline.
dekòmande vt To annul an order.
dekonekte, dekonnekte vt To disconnect*, to cut
off.
dekonpoze vi To decay, to rot, to decompose*.
Kadav la tap dekonpoze The body was decomposing.
vt To make sick, to dishearten. M’dekonpoze I
feel indisposed, nauseated.
dekonpozisyon an n 1. Spell (sickness). 2. Tonbe
an dekonpozisyon To decay.
dekonseye vt To advise against. Li dekon-seye’m
fè sa He advised me not to do that.
dekonstonbre, dekostonbre vt To demolish, to
break down, in the meaning of ‘to beat the devil
out of’; to give a terrible beating; to become
exhausted, worn out. M’a dekostonbre ou I am
going to make mush out of you.
dekorasyon an n Decoration*.
dekore vt To adorn, to decorate*.
dekoròm nan n Manners, propriety. San dekoròm
Unmannerly, vulgar, indecent.
dekou a n The waning phase of the moon. Nan
dekou Diminishing, waning.
dekouche vi To sleep out.
dekoud vt To unstitch. To rip, to become unstitched.
To become incoherent.
dekoupe vt 1. To cut up, to slice, to carve.
2. To interrupt a speaker. Chemen dekoupe Short-
cut.
dekoupèt attrib Cunning, sly, tricky. (syn) rizèz.
dekouraje vt To discourage*. To get down.
dekourajman an n Discouragement*.
dekouvèt la n Discovery*.
dekouvri vt To uncover*, to remove the top; to
discover*, to find, to find out, to detect. To
clear up (weather). Apre lapli, syèl la dekouvri
After a rainfall, the sky clears up.
dekovil n No good, ragged, worthless, cheap,
bad thing. Old jelopy. (syn) bogota.
dekrase vt To empty a container completely by
cleaning it up and by removing each particle
therefrom. To scrape.
dekrenmen attrib Faded, passed one’s prime;
emaciated.
dekreta vt 1. To deprive a woman of her virginity,
to deflower. 2. To cut off the crest* of a rooster.
dekrete vi To decree*. To declare.
dekrochi vt To straighten (out), to unbend.
dekroke V dekoke
D 46
dekrote vt To clean, to scrape.
dekwa n Means, wherewithal. It’s enough that,
it’s the reason for, so that, as a result of that. Ak
dekwa For good reason. Se dekwa pou yo kondane
ou That’s enough for them to convict you. Pa gen
dekwa It doesn’t matter. Don’t mention it.
dekwaze vt To uncross*.
dekwennen vt To skin, to scrape, to excoriate,
to strip off the skin.
delage vt 1. To let loose. V lage. 2. Dejected.
delake vt To eat the bait (lak la) without getting
hooked (fish).
delakè a n 1. Said about a fish that removes the
bait without getting hooked. 2. Loafer, one whose
appearance leaves a lot to be desired.
delala attrib Pooped out, exhausted, down and
out, weakened, shabby.
delase vt To untie (laced* shoes).
delatètopye From head to toe.
delè a n Reprieve, extension of time.
delegasyon an n Delegation*.
delege a n Delegate*.
delèkè attrib Weak, lifeless, downtrodden, tattered.
deleye vt To dilute. Deleye sik la nan kafe a
Dilute some sugar in the coffee.
deleze vt To smooth out, to plane, to trim a
board.
delij la n 1. Deluge*. 2. Great quantity.
delika attrib Delicate*.
delire vi To be delirious*.
delivrans la, ladelivrans n Delivrance*, salvage.
delivre vt 1. To set free, to deliver*. 2. To save,
to salvage. Ou delivre’l nan yon ka You saved him
from that difficulty. 3. To give birth.
demach la n 1. Proceeding, step (toward). Fè
demach To take steps towards. 2. Gait, manner of
walking.
demachware attrib With a dislocated jaw.
demachwele vt To smash s.o.’s jaw.
demagòg la n Demagogue*.
demagoji a n Demagogy*.
demake vi To slip away furtively, to leave.
demakònen vt To untangle.
demanbre vt To batter, to weaken. Exhausted,
battered; dismembered*, maimed. Refers to
someone who has lost a limb, an invalid.
demanche vt To take away (or lose) the handle.
demanjezon an n Itch.
demann nan n 1. A request. 2. An application
(for a job, etc.). V lademann.
demanti vt To contradict, to deny, to give the
lie.
demantibile vt To demolish, to put out of order,
to dislocate, to dismantle*. Yo demantibile vye
kamyon an pou yo kab jwenn pyès derechanj They
dismantled the old truck so that they could find some
spare parts.
demanyè pou In order to, so as to.
demare vt To untie, to loosen. vi 1. To start
off. 2. To become clear (cloudy sky).
demaronnen vt To disentangle.
demaske vt To unmask*.
demaye vt To undo the links of a chain.
demèfle attrib Down and out, weakened, lifeless,
exhausted.
demefyan V mefyan
demelanje vt To unmix.
demele vt To untangle, to unravel, to disentangle,
to extricate one’s self, to clear up. vpr To get
along, to strive. V degaje, mele. M’ap demele’m
pou m’rive alè I’m doing my best to get there on
time.
demen, denmen adv Tomorrow, the following
day, the day after. Demen, si Bondye vle Tomorrow,
Deo volente.
demenaje vi To move, to change one’s residence.
demenajman an n Moving (out), removal. L’ap
fè demenajman He is moving out.
demeplè attrib Vulgar, gross, disagreeable, repugnant.
Disagreeable person.
demi an n 1. Half. 2. Half bottle. 3. Halfback
(soccer). Yon demi è Half an hour.
demisyon an n Resignation (from a position).
demisyonnen vi To resign (from a job).
demòd vi To renege, to retract.
demokrasi a n Democracy*.
demoli vt To demolish*, to tear down.
demon an, denmon an n Type of devil, evil;
demon*. V dyab, satan. An denmon Ready for
anything, good or bad.
demonstrasyon an n Demonstration*. Tou sa
l’ap fè la a se demonstrasyon He’s not for real; he
was just trying to show off; he was just pretending.
demonte vt To disassemble, to dismantle, to
dislocate, to tear down. To dismount*. Van
demonte pòt la The wind knocked the door down.
Bra’l demonte His arm is dislocated.
47 D
demontre vt To demonstrate*.
demoralize vt To demoralize*.
demwatye n Share-cropping. L’ap travay jaden
an demwatye He’s working the field (garden) as a
share cropper.
demwazèl la n 1. Girl, young lady. 2. Dragonfly.
3. Type of fish. Pomacanthus arcuatus.
deng lan n Buttocks. Ou kole nan deng mwen Get
off my back. (You’re sticking to my tail.) V dengon.
dengon, dengonn n Buttocks, back, behind, ass.
M’nan dengon ou I’m after you. I won’t let you be.
deniche vt To uncover, to discover, to unearth.
Mwen resi deniche kote li rete I succeeded in finding
out where he is staying. Kote ou al deniche bagay
sa a? Where did you dig that up?
denigre vt To speak ill of, to disparage, to
knock, to denigrate*, to abuse, to sneer at. M’konnen
kimoun ki denigre’m bay chèf la I know who is
saying bad things about me to the chief.
denmen V demen
denmon V demon
denonse vt To inform on, to denounce*.
denpi V depi
dènye, dennye attrib 1. Last. An dènye Last.
2. All, everyone. DEJEAN-16: Dènye ravin pral
konble Every ravine will be filled. Dènye moun
Everyone, each, every.
dènyèman adv Lately.
deotanba adv From top to bottom.
depa a n Departure*. Ou sou depa ou? You’re
leaving?
depafini (ak) vi 1. To ruin, to exhaust, to wear
out. 2. Exhausted, worn out, terminated.
depale vi To ramble, to digress, to rave, to
speak unintelligibly (as a dying person); to talk
nonsense; to make a slip of the tongue.
depaman An depaman Unmatched, unpaired, spoiled
(as a set); of different colors (clothing, etc.) V de-
pareye.
depan vi To depend*. Sa depan It depends.
depane, depannen vt 1. To repair (to get the
car, the boat, etc., going again). 2. To help
out.
depann vi To depend* (de, on).
depans la n Expense*, expenditure.
depanse vt & vi To spend (money).
depansè a n Big spender.
depareye attrib Unmatched, odd, not of the
same kind.
deparye vt To split up, to separate, to make
uneven, to make odd.
depasay Passing by.
depase vt To surpass*, to exceed, to go beyond,
to overtake. Sa depase’m It’s beyond me. (The
word depase is sometimes used for pase). De
jou depase More than two days.
depasyante vi To lose patience.
depate vt To take apart each banana of a hand.
depatman an n Department*, section.
depatya 1
vt To cut up; to destroy.
depatya, depatcha 2
attrib Shabby, in bad condition.
Li fin depatya He is at his wits’ end; he has
become shabby, emaciated.
depaye vt To remove the bracts (straw, husks)
from any grain-bearing vegetables, hence to shuck
(corn), to shell (peas), to clean (coffee beans),
etc.; to take the straw apart; to come apart (straw
objects).
depèch la n Telegram, dispatch*. M’resevwa
depèch ki di li mouri depi avanyè I received the
telegram which said that he’s been dead since the
day before yesterday.
depeche vpr To hurry, to dispatch*. Di’l depeche’l
Tell him to hurry it up.
depenn vt To describe.
depenyen vt To mess up one’s hair. Van tèlman
soufle fò, li depenyen tout tèt li The wind blew so
hard, it messed up all his hair.
deperi vi To decay, to dwindle away, to perish.
M’pa rouze flè yo; yo fin deperi I didn’t water my
flowers, and they are wilting.
depetre vt To disentangle, to extricate one’s self
from; to come loose.
depeyize vi To expatriate, to leave one’s country.
(fig) To feel strange, out of place.
depi, denpi conj Since; as long as; after, as soon
as, once. Depi’l leve lan kabann li, l’ap babye The
minute he gets out of the bed, he starts grumbling.
PRESSOIR-31: Depi yo fèt Since they were born.
Depi gen tanpèt, kèk bato koule Once there is a
storm, some ships sink. prep Since, from. Yo
mache depi Pòtoprens jis Petyonvil They walked
from Port-au-Prince to Petionville.
depite a n Deputy*, congressman.
deplase vt To displace* (something); to move,
or to change places. M’pa renmen moun deplase
afè’m I don’t like people to move my things. vi To
go out somewhere. M’ap deplase I am going out.
attrib: Out of place, incongruous, excessive.
Pa di’m okenn mo deplase Don’t tell me any improper
(insolent) words.
deplè vt To displease*.
D 48
deplezi a n Displeasure*.
deplimen vt To pluck the feathers, to depilate,
to excoriate.
depliye vt To unfold.
deploge vt To unplug*.
deplotonnen vt 1. To unwind (a spool). 2. To
disengage after an embrace.
deploye vt To unfold.
depo a n Storeroom, storage; deposit. Mete an
depo To store, to deposit. Fè yon depo To make a
deposit (in the bank).
depole vi To dislocate, to become out of joint
(shoulder), disjointed.
depòte vt To deport*.
depotwa a n Trash deposit, dump.
depoze vt 1. To put, to place, to deliver; to
deposit*, to put down. Depoze yon lèt lapòs To
mail a letter. 2. To make a deposit* (for a lay
away plan, etc.).
depozisyon an n Deposition*, testimony. Fè
depozisyon To testify.
deprave attrib Perverse (perverted), depraved*.
depreferans adv Rather.
depri attrib Untangled (an animal).
deranje vt To disturb, to annoy; to upset (physically
or mentally); to damage, to disarrange*, to cause
disorder. Li pran yon so, janm li deranje He fell
and the bones in his leg were dislocated.
deranjman an n Disturbance, trouble; stomach
upset; mechanical defect, malfunction.
derapan An derapan Upon starting, at the begin-
ning.
derape, derap vi To get off, to start (car), to
take off (airplane); to start, to move by itself
(auto). N’ap derape We’re going to start, to get
under way. Bato a derape The ship has weighed
anchor (and left).
derapin nan n 1. Type of hoe with a long blade.
Abitan travay di, yo voye derapin toulejou Farmers
work hard; they hoe the ground everyday. 2. (attrib)
Shameless, restless street girl.
derasinen vt To pull out plants by the roots, to
uproot, to root out.
deraye vi To derail*, to be derailed*; to be very
angry, to talk nonsense. Depi yè, li fin deraye
Since yesterday, she hasn’t been making sense (she
hasn’t been herself).
derechany prep phr Spare. Vire tounen ou bezwen
pyès derechanj From time to time one needs spare
parts.
derefize vt (pop) for refize, to refuse*. Li
derefize monte abò He refuses to go aboard.
deregle attrib Unruly; out of order; libertine.
Also used for irregular (referring to a woman
whose period is irregular). Si granmoun goumen
ak timoun, li deregle If an adult fights with a
child, he must be out of his mind. Depi kèk tan, l’ap
mennen vi deregle For some time now, she’s been
leading a loose life.
derespektan attrib Disrespectful*, insolent.
derespekte vt To be disrespectful* (towards).
derezonnen vi To rave, to talk irrationally*.
V varye.
derije Metathesis for dijere (pop).
deriv la n Drift. A la deriv Drifting.
dèrò V deyò
deronte attrib Shameless.
deroule vt To unreel, to unroll*, to develop, to
display.
dèryè V dèyè
deryen prep phr Moun deryen Insignificant, worthless
person; plebeian.
desandans la n Offspring, descendant*.
desanm nan n December*.
desann, disann vi 1. To get down, to step down,
to go down, to come down, to get off (passenger),
to descend*. 2. To overflow (river). 3. To stop
(overnight), to lodge. vt To eat, to gobble
down. Examples and expressions: Monte desann
To go up and down. Larivyè desann There is high
water in the river. Desann ou Don’t be so fresh, so
arrogant. Li pral desann lan bakalorea He is
going to the final exams (high school).
desant 1
Fè desantdelye To visit the scene (officially).
desant V ladesant 2
desè a n Dessert*.
desele vt To unsaddle*.
desen an n Drawing, design*, sketch.
desepsyon an n Disappointment, deception*.
Pran desepsyon To be rebuffed. Fè desepsyon To
rebuff s.o.
desere vt To loosen. Desere dan ou Say something
(stop pouting).
desèvi vt To clear the table.
desèvis, de sèvis prep phr On duty.
desi attrib Deceived*, disappointed.
deside vi 1. To resolve, to decide*. 2. (vpr) To
make up one’s mind. Resolute, determined.
desideman adv After all, in truth, really, finally.
Desideman, sa’l di a vre After all, what he said is
true.
desinen vt To draw, to design*.
49 D
desiskole a n Homosexual.
desitire, desitye vt To get rid of, to reject. To
keep s.o. away from a place (where he was formerly
tolerated).
desizyon an n Decision*.
dèske conj Since, because.
desoude vi To become unsoldered. To reopen
(soldered seam).
desoule vi To sober up.
desounen vt To stun, to make groggy, to wheedle.
Also Vodou term.
desten an n Fate, destiny*.
destine a n Destiny*, fate.
destriksyon an n Destruction*.
dèt la n Debt*.
detache vt To loosen, to detach*, to untie, to
unbind. vi To come off, to (be)come loose.
detake vt To unlatch, to open (to unbolt only).
To untack*.
detan conj While, as. Detan Jezikri tap pale As
Jesus was speaking. V etan.
detay la n Detail*; retail; superfluous details. An
detay In detail; retail. Tou sa se detay Come to the
point.
detaye vt 1. To retail, to sell at retail. Li pa vle
detaye She won’t sell retail. 2. To examine s.o.
meticulously as if searching for faults. To scrutinize.
3. To narrate with minute details*.
detektif la n Detective*.
detenn vi To fade, to discolor. Detenn (sou) To
run (into), to spread. Rad rouj la ap detenn sou
rad blan an The red dress runs into the white
dress. Pyè ap detenn sou ou Peter is giving you his
bad manners (or) You are getting to be like Peter.
Ble detenn Faded blue.
detere vt To unearth, to dig up.
deteryore vi To deteriorate*.
detestab attrib Hateful.
deteste vt To hate, to detest*.
detire vi To stretch one’s self.
detou a n Detour*, deviation; subterfuge.
detounasyon an n Corruption.
detounen vt To lead astray. To divert. M’nonmen
non ou, m’pa detounen ou (a popular saying used
when the name of a deceased person is men-
tioned).
detoutfason adv Anyhow, in any event.
detrès la n Distress*.
detrese vt To unbraid (hair); to unravel (rope).
detripe vt To gut. To draw (carve) an animal; to
rip apart.
detrui, detwi vt To destroy*, to do away with.
detyedi vt To make lukewarm.
devale vt To run down a slope.
devalize vt To rob s.o. of everything he was
carrying, or that was in his home; to rifle, to
plunder.
devan an 1
n 1. The front, what’s in front. M’pa
gen devan, m’pa gen dèyè I’m alone in the world.
2. Penis, genitals.
devan, douvan 2
prep & adv Before, in front
(of), opposite, ahead (of). Devan dèyè The
front part in the back, hindpart foremost. Sa ki
devan? Who’s leading? Pi devan kay la Beyond
the house. Pran devan To go first, to lead, to
precede, to walk ahead.
devanjou, douvanjou, vanjou adv 1. Before daybreak.
2. An early morning ‘koumbit’ (COUR-
LANDER).
devanti a n Front (of a building), facade.
devantre vt To disembowel.
devas la n Disaster, act of God (storm, flood,
etc.).
devaste vt To devastate*, to lay waste.
devègonde attrib Shameless, vulgar.
devenn nan n Bad luck, misfortune. Pa mete
dyòl sou mwen pou ou pa ban’m devenn Don’t say
such things about me or you might give me bad luck.
devi a n Estimate.
devide vt To empty.
devine, divine vt To guess, to devine*.
devinè V divinò
devinèt la n Riddle, puzzle, enigma.
devire 1
vi To make a turn; to turn off, to turn
aside. vt Devire yon koze To misquote (s.o.)
changing the meaning of his words.
devire a 2
n Errand, short absence. Li fè yon ti
devire lan katye a He is taking a short walk in the
neighborhood; he went to visit some friends in the
vicinity.
devise vt To unscrew.
devizaje vt To give one the once over, to stare in
order to ascertain what s.o. can measure up to.
devlope vt 1. To develop*, to increase in strength.
2. To unfold, to unwrap.
devlopman an n Development*.
devni vi To become. Sa’l devni? What has
become of him? What happened to him?
D 50
devore vt To devour*, to eat up; to slander, to
disparage.
devouman an n Devotion.
devwa a n Duty, task; obligation; homework
(school). Li konn devwa’l He really knows his
duties (both material and moral). Also: a Vodou
term.
devwale vt To unveil*, to discover (uncover,
reveal). BEAUBRUN/A-33: Pa janm devwale sa
Never reveal the secret.
devwe attrib To be devoted* to. Devoted*. Said
of a person who is always ready to render service
to anyone.
devye vi To swerve, to ricochet, to deviate*. Fè
devye To deflect.
dèy la n Mourning, bereavement. An dèy In
mourning. Pran dèy To mourn. Pote dèy To wear
mourning clothes.
dèyè a 1
n Behind, back, rear*; bottom, buttocks;
backing (support).
dèyè, dèryè 2
prep Behind, back of, in the rear
of; after, in pursuit of. Dèyè mòn gen mòn Behind
each mountain there are still more mountains. L’al
dèyè yo He went after (pursued) them.
dèyè, dèryè 3
adv Behind, back, rear. Rete dèyè
To lag behind. Janm dèyè yo The hind legs. Pa
dèyè Back(wards). Chèz la pati pa dèyè The chair
fell back(wards).
dèyèdo a n 1. Bitter (medicinal) plant used for
stomach aches, etc. The name comes from sori
on the back side of the leaves. 2. A beverage
made with the leaves soaked in kleren (white,
raw rum).
deyò a 1
n Exterior, outside.
deyò, dèrò 2
adv Out, outside, away, outward.
Sou deyò Outwardly. Li deyò pou He has the
intention to; he is making plans for. Cf. E. He is out
to... An deyò In the country, away. Moun an deyò
Country folks. Mete deyò To put out, to let out, to
eject, to throw out; to depart, to go out, to leave, to
get away.
dezabitye vi To lose the habit* of.
dezabiye vt To undress. DEJEAN-36: Yo de-zabiye’l
They undressed him.
dezablaza a n Party, revelry, bash.
dezafi a n 1. Cockfight; challenge in a cockfight;
entire cockfighting season. 2. Title of a delightful
novel entirely in Creole by Frankétienne.
dezagrafe vt To unhook.
dezagreman an n Trouble, problem, unpleasantness.
Evite’m dezagreman Don’t give me any trouble.
Machann dezagreman Quarrelsome person.
dezagreyab attrib 1. Disagreeable*, unpleasant.
2. Grumpy, moody.
dezakò a n Discord*, dissension, disagreement,
misunderstanding. An dezakò In disagreement.
Yo an dezakò They disagree.
dezame vt To disarm*.
dèzan Depi dèzan For a long time. M’pa wè’l depi
dèzan I haven’t seen him in ages.
dezanfle vi To go down (swelling), to disinflate*.
Machwa a dezanfle The swelling of the jaw has
gone down.
dezangoudi vi To revive, to sensitize, to excite.
dezannuiye, dezannouye vt 1. To rid one’s self
of boredom, to cheer up. 2. To relieve somebody’s
boredom.
dezanpare vpr To get rid of. San dezanpare
Without stopping, immediately. M’bezwen dezanpare’m
de li I need to get rid of him.
dezapiye vi To stop leaning.
dezaprann vt To forget what one has learned.
dezaprouve vt To disapprove*.
dezas la n Disaster*.
dezavantaj la, dezavantay la n Disadvantage*,
drawback.
dezè a n Desert*.
dezekilibre attrib Out of sorts, out of balance;
disequilibrated*. BEAUBRUN/L-31: Sèvo li ki
dezekilibre His mind which is off balance.
dezenfekte vt To disinfect*. Avan ou rete lan kay
la, dezenfekte’l Before you move into the house,
disinfect it.
dezespere vi To despair*.
dezespwa a n Despair*.
dezi a n Desire*.
dezinyon an n Dissension. Yo vin mete de-zinyon
nan fanmi an They caused dissension in the family.
dezipe vt To unzip*.
dezire vt To desire*.
dezobeyi vt To disobey*.
dezobeyisan attrib Disobedient*.
dezoblijan attrib Nasty, disagreeable. Sometimes
refers to a person who never helps anybody.
dezòd 1
attrib Disorderly*, unruly. Ou dezòd
You’re a mess. You’re disorderly.
dezòd la 2
n Disorder*. Misbehavior, blameworthy
(or) reprehensible act; promiscuity, loose morals.
Tifi a tonbe lan dezòd The girl has become a
loose woman.
dezòdone attrib Disordely (person).
dezole vt To desolate*.
51 D
dezonè a, dezonnè a n Dishonor*, disgrace.
dezose 1
attrib Boneless; bone-dry, emaciated,
very thin.
dezose 2
vt To remove the bones of fish, chicken,
etc. Yo sèvi pwason dezose They served boneless
fish.
dezoutwa, dezotwa, de twa A few, two or three.
dezyèm num Second.
dezyèmman adv Second(ly). In the second place.
di 1
attrib Hard, durable*; strenuous; (adv) firmly.
Vin di To harden.
di 2
vt To say, to tell; to pronounce. Vle di To
mean. Pa vle di (or) pa di Doesn’t mean.
PRESSOIR-10: Papiyon an di’l: Mwen renmen ou
The butterfly said to her (the dragonfly): I love you.
Di orevwa To bid farewell.
dibout V doubout
dibreyis la n Rags. Ragged old clothes.
dibyen (Some) good, favor. Li fè’m dibyen He
did me some favor(s). Medikaman an fè’m dibyen
The drug did me some good.
dichay attrib Discharged*. V dechaje.
dife a n Fire, fire-brand; sensation. Dife! Fire!
Pouse dife To incite, to instigate. Gro dife Blaze.
Dife jenès Acne. Mete dife To ignite.
diferan attrib Different*.
diferans la n Difference*.
difikilte a n Hardship, difficulty*.
difisil attrib Difficult*, hard (not easy).
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-25: Laliy se bagay ki difisil
Being a taxi driver is not an easy matter.
difòm attrib Misshaped, distorted. Deformed*
(born that way). Another Creole word of the
same origin (defòme) means to become deformed,
to lose the original form.
difteri a n Diphtheria*.
dig la n Dam; ditch, canal, dike*.
digdal Yon digdal A lot of, many.
dige vt To prick, to stick with a finger, to goad.
digèt la, didjèt la n Goad, stick. Digèt bwa
chandèl Wooden goad which is used to make torches.
Fanm sa a (mache) digèt That woman walks like a
goad, i.e. she is lean, wiry, and walks fast.
digo a, endigo a n Indigo*, blue. Indigofera
tinctoria L. (A vat dye used in washing clothes).
digonnen vt To goad.
dija V deja
dijere vt To digest*. V derije.
dijesyon an, dijestyon an n Digestion*.
dikdantan adv A long time (ago).
diksyonè a, diksyonnè a n Dictionary*.
dikte 1
vt To dictate*.
dikte a 2
n Dictation*.
dilatasyon an n Expansion. Fè dilatasyon To
bring about an abortion in a particular manner.
dilijans la, delijans la n Diligence*. Fè di-lijans
pou mwen Do it fast, please hurry for my sake.
dimal, di mal Evil. Fè yon moun dimal To harm
s.o.
dimanch la n Sunday. Dimanch Ramo Palm
Sunday. San dimanch Incessantly, without stopping,
no ‘holidays’. Bouch fanm san dimanch A woman’s
mouth never keeps still.
dimaten, di maten adv In the morning, A.M.
diminye, diminwe vt To reduce, to diminish*,
to abridge, to decrease.
dimoman, di moman adv From the moment
when; as soon as. Dimoman li vini, m’a fè ou
konnen As soon as he comes, I will let you know.
dinamik attrib Dynamic* (person).
dinamit la, dilamit la n Dynamite*.
dinaza a n One’s best suit.
dine a n Dinner*. In Haiti, (usu) refers to
‘noon meal’ and not ‘supper’.
dinen, dine vi To lunch, to dine*, to eat.
diplòm nan n Degree, school diploma*. Pran
diplòm To graduate.
diplomat la n Diplomat*.
dirab attrib Solid, strong (that which lasts a long
time), lasting, durable*.
diran prep During*. Diran peryòd eleksyon sa a
During this electoral period. Lavi diran For life,
lifelong.
dirantan, diranpandan adv All the time, continuously;
for a long time.
dire 1
vi To last, to endure*.
dire 2
Kòm ki dire As if, that is to say, one would
say. 2. On dire, an dire It seems. An dire se li It
seems it is he.
dirèk 1
attrib Direct*, straightforward. (adv)
directly*.
dirèk la 2
n Short form of the word direktè.
direksyon an n Direction*. Li chanje direk-syon
He went in another direction.
direktè a, dirèk la n 1. Director* (of an office).
2. Principal (of a school).
dirèkteman adv Directly*, naturally, surely, clearly.
D 52
direktris la n (fem) Principal of a school. Cf.
E. directress*.
diri a n Rice*. Tèt diri Rice husk.
dirije vt To direct*; to head, to be in charge of.
dis num Ten. In liaison, the letter s becomes
voiced to a z. Dizan Ten years. Fi a gen dis dwèt
li (or) dis dwèt li rele’l pa’l This woman is a
hard worker; she is skillful with her fingers.
disèt 1
Disèt lajè Very big, very wide.
disèt 2
num Seventeen.
disi adv From now until, between now and...
N’a plante karòt disi mwa prochen Between now
and next month, we’re going to plant carrots.
disip la n Disciple*.
disiplin nan n Discipline*.
diskisyon an n Quarrel, disagreement, argument.
Discussion*.
diskite vi To haggle, to argue, to discuss*.
diskotèk la n Discotheque*.
diskou a n (Formal) speech, discourse*.
disloke vt To dislocate*.
disoud vt To dissolve*.
dispansè a n Dispensary*.
disparèt vi To disappear*, to vanish, to go away.
vt To cause to disappear. Disparèt ou devan’m
Get out of my sight.
dispoze attrib Disposed*. Byen dispoze Well
disposed.
dispozisyon an n Disposition*; feeling (for);
temper, character. Pran dispozisyon To take steps.
distans la n Distance*.
distenge 1
vt To distinguish*; to make out (in
the meaning of ‘to distinguish’ only).
distenge 2
attrib Distinguished* (manners).
distraksyon an n Fun, pastime, diversion, distrac-
tion*.
distrè, distrèt attrib Inattentive, absent-minded;
distracted*. Slightly off balance. When ‘distrèt’
is used, it applies to females.
distribisyon an n Distribution*. Fè distribisyon
To distribute*.
distribye vt To distribute, to give out.
distrik la n District*, canton.
diswa, di swa adv In the evening. Uit è di swa
Eight o’clock P. M.
dite a n Tea* (word used in the North). V te a.
ditò V tò
ditou adv Not at all, never. M’pa wè zanmi’m
ditou I never see my friend(s) anymore.
divage vi To ramble, to talk nonsense; to digress.
divan an n Divan*, couch, lounge.
divè a n Down (tiny feathers).
diven an n Wine. Mete dlo nan diven’w Calm
down. Don’t get excited. Diven kann Sugar cane
juice.
divengòl la n Shabby straw mat.
divès indef adj Various, several, many. Diverse*.
divine V devine
divinèz la, devinèz la n Same meaning as ‘divinò’,
but applies to females.
divinò a, divinè a, devinè a n Fortune-teller,
seer. Guesser at riddles (male). V chapitè.
divize vt To divide*.
divizyon 1
Yon divizyon A lot of, many. Yon divizyon
travayè fèk rive A lot of workers just arrived.
divizyon 2
an n Division* (arithmetic).
divòs la n Divorce*.
divòse vi To get divorced. Divòse ak To divorce.
diyite a n 1. Dignity*. 2. Penis.
dizèl la n Diesel*.
dizèn nan n 1. About ten. 2. Decade (rosary).
dizèt la n Dearth, scarcity, famine.
diznèf num Nineteen.
dizon 1
Dizon di To tell the truth, actually. Let’s
say...
dizon an 2
n Agreement, understanding. Accord,
approval.
dizon 3
V kòm
dizyèm num Tenth.
djagonal V dyagonal
djak V dyak
djake V dyake
djakpòt V dyakpòt
djal V dyal
djandjan V dyandyan
djanni an, dyanni an n Junk food; junk.
djaweton an n Type of drum.
djayi, djay vi To shake violently, to have convul-
sions.
djenn V genn
djèt la n Jet* (airplane).
53 D
djevo a, dyevo a n Sanctuary in a hounfò (Vodou
temple).
djip la n Jeep*.
djipopo V adjipopo
djobe V dyobe
djoke V dyoke
djòl V dyòl
djòlè V dyòlè
djondjon V dyondyon
djondjonnen V dyondyonnen
djougan V dyougan
dlo a, dyo a, glo a, gyo a n 1. Water. 2. attrib
Liquid, watery. Examples and expressions: Dlo
benit Holy water. Ala manje dlo! What a washing
(food)! (too watery) V dlololo. Dlo kokoye
Coconut milk. Dlo lacho Whitewash. Dlo bouch
Saliva. Dlo oksijene Hydrogen peroxide. Konnen
yon leson kou dlo To know a lesson thoroughly.
Dlo lapli Rainwater. Ak dlo nan je’l With tears in
her eyes. Dlo pwa Thin beansoup. Dlo sous
Spring water. Dènye bwè pi bon dlo The last one
drinks the best water. He who is last has the advantage.
Projè a tonbe nan dlo The project has aborted. Yon
gro dlo A swift current, a lot of water. Lòt bò dlo
On the other side of the ocean (sea). Met dlo nan
diven’w Calm down. M’pa konn dlo I can’t swim.
Machann dlo Water-carrier, water-vender. Ma dlo
Puddle, pond, stagnant water. Sant manje a fè
bouch mwen kouri dlo The (sweet) odor of the food
makes my mouth water. Yo vinn sou dlo They came
by sea.
dlololo, kyòlòlò attrib Watery (food). Manje a
dlololo That food is nothing but water.
do 1
aux v Variant of dwe.
do 2
Word used in the knucklebone game. V oslè.
do a 3
n Back (person, animal, chair); roof, top.
Do kay la koule, se pou yo mete mastik sou li The
roof of that house is leaking; you have to put roof
coating on it. Li vire do ban mwen He turned his
back on me. Li vire do’l, l’al fè rout li He turned
and went away. Yo fè pil sou do’m (or) Yo bay
sou do’m They’re talking behind my back. Chinen
do bourik la The spine (backbone) of the donkey.
Cf. E. chine. Pa apiye, do chèz la kase Don’t lean
backward; the back of the chair is broken. Yo mete
nou dozado They caused us to become enemies.
dòb la n Stew, daube*. A big fat piece of meat,
particularly good for stewing.
dodin nan n Rocking chair.
dodinen vi To rock, to swing, to balance.
dodo vi To sleep. Also: Fè dodo. Dodo ti titit
manman’l. Si ti titit la pa dodo chat maron an va
manje’l Sleep baby, sleep. If mommie’s little baby
doesn’t sleep, the wild-cat will eat him. (Well known
lullaby).
dodomea vi To rest; to swing slowly, to lull, to
slumber. Li fin travay; l’ap dodomea He’s through
working; he’s taking a rest.
dòk V doktè
doki a n First son born after twins. Also: dosou.
dokiman an n Document*, official paper.
doktè a, dòk n 1. Doctor*, physician; learned
person. 2. Quack, know-it-all. Sometimes abbreviated
to dòk as in E. Doktè fèy Herb doctor.
Cf. bòkò. Doktè dan (or) Dantis Dentist. Doktè
moun fou Psychiatrist. Doktè timoun Pediatrician.
Tout moun rele’l ‘doktè’, paske li fò nan metye’l
Everyone calls him ‘doctor’ because he is very knowledgeable
in his profession.
dola a n Dollar* (USA).
dole vt 1. To slice thin; (syn) filange. 2. To get
along. M’ap dole I am getting along.
doliv Luil doliv Olive oil*.
dòlmann nan n A heavy jacket (coat).
dòlote vt To cuddle, to caress, to baby, to
cherish.
domaj la, donmaj la n Damage*; infirmity. Se
domaj! What a shame! Too bad!
domaje, donmaje, andomaje vt To disfigure, to
damage*. Moun domaje Lame, cripple.
domenn nan n Property, land, field, domain*.
domestik la, donmestik la n Servant, domestic*.
dòmèz la, donmèz la n Type of lounging chair
(long, light, folding chair).
dòmi 1
vi To sleep. M’pa dòmi reve sa I
completely forgot about that.
dòmi an 2
n Sleep. Dòmi nan je’w? Are you
sleepy? Dòmi pran’l He fell asleep. Dòmi tronpe’m
I overslept.
domine, dominen vt 1. To make one’s self master
of; to dominate*. 2. To get the upper hand; to
get (have) control. 3. To boss over. Pa kite
problèm nan domine’w Don’t let it get the better of
you. Li kite madanm li do-mine’l He lets his wife
boss him.
domino a n Dominoes (game).
don an, donn nan 1
n Crop, yield of a plant or
tree.
don an, grandon an 2
n Big, wealthy landlord.
donab, donnab, donan attrib Generous, liberal.
donan donan Reciprocal giving. It means: If you
give me one, I’ll give you one. Nothing for nothing.
Ak Pyè se donan donan Peter won’t give you
anything, unless you give him something also.
doneson an n Harvest, rendering, yield.
donk conj Consequently, therefore.
D 54
donn nan V don
donnè, donè At a card game, if you win 4 straight
games. M’donnè I won 4.
donnen vi 1. To yield a harvest (fruit). Pyebwa
sa a pa donnen ankò This tree doesn’t produce
anymore fruit. 2. (fig) To fool around, to lose
time. M’pa vin donnen isit I didn’t come here to
stay (too long). 3. To show an outgrowth (malignant
pustule or pimple). Vyann donnen Outgrowth
of flesh and skin.
donpèd n 1. Sorcery. 2. A loa (Don Pedro).
donte vt To tame, to break in (an animal).
(fig) To take hold of a person, i.e. to take the
devil out of him, to make him behave henceforth,
to tame him.
donzèl la n 1. Girl. 2. Wench, loose girl.
dorad la n Dorado*, gilthead (fish). Coryphaena
hippurus. (fig) A prostitute.
dore 1
vt To brown (cooking); to frost (cake).
dore 2
attrib Golden, gilded. PRESSOIR-21: Bèl
ti zèl dore Beautiful golden wings. Chabin dore A
woman with light skin and golden yellow hair.
dosa a n Girl born after twins. V dosou.
dosil attrib Docile*.
dosou a n The first boy born after twins. Also:
doki. If a girl: dosa.
dosye a n 1. Record, dossier*. 2. Back (of a
chair).
dòt la 1
n Dowry*.
dòt 2
V lòt
dotan ke, dotan pli ke conj phr All the more
(since, as). Leson an te dotan pli fasil ke se
dezyèm fwa m’etidye’l The lesson was that much
easier, since I was studying it for the second time.
dotwi Byen dotwi The neighbor’s, someone else’s
goods.
dou 1
adv 1. Santi dou To have a peculiar, bad
smell, like the smell of a fish. 2. Fè zye dou To eye
s.o. expressing love and admiration (an invitation).
dou, dous 2
attrib Gentle, mild, agreeable, soft,
tender, tranquil. Yon fou dou A non violent
insane person.
doub 1
attrib Double*. Doub sis Two sixes (in
games).
doub la 2
n 1. Double*. 2. Second copy. An
doub Original and one copy. 3. Story, gossip.
M’gen yon doub pou’m ba ou I have a story to tell
you.
double vt To double*; to repeat; to reinforce; to
line (a garment); to overtake (pass) a vehicle;
to have a secong helping (food). Double yon rad
To reline clothing. Double yon machin To pass, to
overtake a car. Double (or) Kase double To
begin, to start (over) again (rain, etc.). Double yon
klas To repeat a grade (in school).
doublon an n Antique coin. Doubloon*, a piece
of eight.
doubout, dibout attrib 1. Standing, erect. Tete
doubout Pointed (erect) teats. 2. Fresh, insolent.
douch la n Shower (bath).
doudous la, ladoudous n Something sweet. Fè
doudous pou To caress.
douk la n Bump. Chemen douk Bumpy road.
Koupe douk A children’s game involving fingers. A
child will say ‘Douk ou!’.
doukla attrib Dan doukla Crooked (out of line)
tooth.
douko 1
vt To paint (a car, a refrigerator).
Duco* (trade name).
douko a 2
n Enamel paint for metal.
doukounou an n A pastry similar to a hard
akasan wrapped in a banana leaf. It countains
corn, sugar, salt, cinnamon, etc., and resembles
corn pudding.
doulè a n 1. Pain, ache. 2. Grief, anguish. Zanmi’m
gen doulè vant My friend has a stomach ache.
doum V droum
doumbwèy la, doumbrèy la n Dumpling (a ball
of dough in soup).
dous 1
vt To sweeten.
dous 2
attrib Sweet.
dous la 3
n A milk based confection. Types:
dous lèt, dous makòs, etc.
dousè a n Sweetness.
dousi, adousi vt To sweeten.
dousman adv Slowly; quietly.
dout la n Doubt*. V doutans.
doutans la n Doubt*. V dout.
doute vt & vi To doubt*.
douvan V devan
douvanjou V devanjou
douyèt attrib Delicate (person).
douz num Twelve.
douzèn nan, douzenn nan, ladouzèn n Dozen*.
douzyèm num Twelfth.
doye vt To tell (read) cards from marks on
their back or edges.
dòz la n Dose*, dosis*, dosage*; mixture.
55 D
dozado attrib Back to back, opposite. De moun
sa yo te zanmi, yo vin dozado These two were great
friends, now they are enemies.
dra a n Blanket, cloth, shroud, bedsheet, bed
clothes. M’se dra You are putting the blame on me
to cover your own mistakes.
dragon an n Dragon*.
draje a n Candy.
dram nan n Drama*.
drandran attrib Gummy. Je drandran Eyes with
gummy eyelids.
drapo a n Flag, banner. Jwèt drapo A children’s
game. Kenbe bwa drapo a To maintain one’s
dignity in spite of adversity.
drapri a n Curtain, drapery*.
dray la, dray klining nan n Dry cleaning*. Pote
rad nan dray To carry clothes to the dry cleaning
establishment.
drayvin nan n Drive-in* (cinema).
dren an n (underground) Drainpipe*.
drese vt 1. To dish out, to serve, to dress* (food).
2. To train (horse, dog). 3. To erect; to stand
erect. 4. To straighten. Drese kò ou Sit up
straight. Drese tèt ou Raise your head. Drese yon
lis To make (prepare) a list. Drese kabann To
make the bed.
drèt V dwat
dri attrib & adv Thick, close-knitted; frequent(ly),
often. Zèb la vini dri (or) Zèb la pouse dri The
grass grows thick.
dril la n Drill* (tool).
driv la n Drift. Aladriv Drifting. Bèl driv A long
time ago. L’al lekòl bèl driv, li poko tounen He
went to school a long time ago; he hasn’t returned
yet. Gen bèl driv depi m’pa wè’l It’s a long time,
since I’ve seen him.
drivaye vi To drift, to keep dragging; to wander
around. V drive.
drivayè a, drivayèz n Drifter, loafer, rover, bum,
wanderer. One who never stays home. The word
drivayèz applies to a woman.
drivayèz V drivayè
drive vi To drift; to wander, to loiter. Soulye’w
ap drive nan tout kay la Your shoes are all over the
house (not in their proper place).
dròg la n Drug* (marijuana, heroin, etc.)
droge vt To drug*, to give a potion to s.o.
dròl attrib Funny, peculiar, unusual, droll*, suspicious,
strange, queer.
droum nan, doum nan, dronm nan n (Oil,
gasoline) Drum*; any large container in the form
of a drum.
dwa 1
Kom sa dwa, komsadwa As it should be.
dwa a 2
n 1. Right. Li gen dwa pale, di verite He
has the right to talk, to say the truth. Li gen dwa pa
wè sa Maybe he didn’t see that. Bay dwa To
entitle. Li an dwa fè sa He is within his rights. An
dwa = gen dwa.
dwa a 3
n Tax. Dwa lanmò Tax(es) paid by an
heir to legalize and transfer his inheritance on the
records.
dwa a 4
n Inch; finger (a measurement).
dwa a, ledwa 5
n Law. Fè ledwa To study law. V
lwa2
a.
dwany lan n Paterfamilias. Doyen.
dwat, drèt attrib 1. Right as opposed to left. Men
dwat Right hand. 2. Straight, direct. Liy dwat
Straight line. Tèt li pa drèt He is slightly demented.
(adv) Straight. Fè tou dwat Go straight ahead.
dwategòch attrib & adv Mixed-up. Soulye li
dwategòch He has the wrong shoe on the wrong
foot.
dwatèt Pa dwatèt Should not, must not. Gason
konsa pa dwatèt pote pantalon Such men should not
wear pants (From a song).
dwayen an, dweyen an n Dean*.
dwe 1
vi 1. Should, must, ought, to have to; may,
to be possible. Li pa vin travay, li dwe malad He
didn’t come to work; he may be sick. Lè a rive, ou
dwe ale The time has come; you must go now.
PRESSOIR-22: Menm si yo dwe boule zèl yo Even
if they have to get their wings burnt. MORISSEAULEROY/A-18:
Sa’l pat dwe fè What he should not
have done.
dwe 2
vt To owe. Konbyen ou dwe’m How much
do you owe me?
dwèl la n Stave (of a cask).
dwèt la n Finger. Dwèt jouda Index finger. Se
koupe dwèt! It’s so delicious! Gen dwèt long To be
thievish. Yon chat dis dwèt A thief.
dyab la, gyab la n Demon, devil*. Depi dyab te
kaporal A long time ago, for a long time. V demon,
satan.
dyabèt la n Diabetes*.
dyablès la n She-devil, female ghost, demon.
dyage, djage vt To stab. Pòl te gen kont ak fi a, li
dyage’l Paul got into an argument with the girl; he
stabbed her.
dyagonal, dyagonnal, djagonal la n Diagonal*.
An dyagonal Diagonally. Kwense yon moun lan
dyagonal To corner s.o., to get s.o.
dyak la, djak la n 1. Jack* (cards). 2. Jack*,
screw-jack (tool).
dyake, djake vt To jack* up (car). (fig) To lift
up (s.o.). Dyake’m Help me out; jack me up.
E 56
dyakoukoul la, dyakoukout la n Type of torture
whereby a person is jacked up and beaten.
dyakout la n Matted straw bag to be thrown over
the shoulder. It is smaller than a ‘makout’.
dyakpòt la, dyapòt la, djakpòt la n Jackpot*; slot
machine. Also: big success. Bay dyakpòt To
vomit. V vomi.
dyal la, djal la n Girl* (friend), gal*.
dyaman an n Diamond*.
dyandyan, djandjan attrib Many-colored, gaudy.
dyanm, djanm attrib Firm, solid, well-built, robust.
Kay isi sanble yo dyanm The houses here seem
solid, strong.
dyare a n Diarrhea*.
dyaz la, djaz la n Jazz*; band (popular music).
Fè dyaz To vomit.
dyaze, djaze vi To ramble, to talk nonsense; to
gossip.
dyazmann nan n Member of a musical band.
dyesèlmevwa a n Masturbation. Cf. laponyèt
(bat).
dyèt la n Diet* (restricted feeding). Doktè mete’m
nan dyèt The physician put me on a restricted diet.
dyevo V djevo
Dyo n Joe, Joseph.
dyòb la, djòb la n Employment, trade, work,
task, job*; racket, graft.
dyobe, djobe, gyobe vi To do a piece of work,
to do a job.
dyobè a, djobè n Jobber*.
dyòk la, djòk la n Evil spell. V maldyòk.
dyoke, djoke vt To bewitch. To cast an evil spell
(on).
dyòl la, djòl la, gyòl la n Snout, mouth (of
animals), face. Nan dyòl ou! Oh Yeah! The same
to you. Li gen bon dyòl He likes to eat; he is a
gourmet. Senatè a gen dyòl dous The senator can
soft (sweet) talk you. Yo rete dyòl ouvri They were
flabbergasted, dumbfounded. Li rete dyòl loulou With
his mouth wide open in astonishment and admiration.
Lonje dyòl To pout. Youn krache lan dyòl lòt They
agreed to tell the same story (falsehood).
dyola a, djola a n Straw sack, bag. V dyakout.
dyòlè, djòlè, gyòlè attrib Boastful, loud-mouthed.
Moun pa renmen gason ki dyòlè. People don’t like
men who brag too much.
dyondyon an, djondjon an n Mushroom in
general and specially a species of small black
mushroom. Boletus aereus.
dyondyonnen, djondjonnen vi To proliferate.
dyougan, djougan attrib Active, energetic, viva-
cious.
E
e conj And. (Used between two clauses and not
between two words). Pyebwa a tonbe e nonm nan
blese The tree fell and the man was injured.
è n Hour*; o’clock. Inè One o’clock (or) One
hour. Senkè Five o’clock (or) Five hours. M’ap
rive a katrè I shall arrive at 4. M’ap rive nan katrè
I shall arrive in four hours.
ebenis la, ebennis la n Cabinet maker. Also:
bòs ebenis. Yon ebenis fèt pou l’gen rap li pou
travay A cabinet maker must have his grater to do
his work.
ebete, enbete attrib Idiotic, dazed, bewildered,
muddled, stupid. Rann ebete To dull, to render
stupid. Cf. E. hebetate.
eboulman an n Landslide.
ebyen V enben
echafo a n 1. Scaffold*, schaffolding*. 2. Seahorse.
echalòt V chalòt
echantiyon an, chantiyon n Sample.
echap la n 1. Sash, scarf*. 2. Sling. Bra an echap
Arm in a sling.
echapman an n Exhaust. Tiyo echapman oto The
exhaust pipe in a car.
echwe, chwe vi 1. To fail, to flunk, to fall through.
2. To run aground (ship). 3. To end up (some-
where).
èd la, lèd la n 1. Aid*, help, relief. 2. Helper.
Li ban’m yon ti èd He helped me out a little.
ede, ride, rende, jende, ide, ende vt To help, to
aid*, to assist.
edikasyon an, ledikasyon an n Instruction, education;
good manners, breeding, upbringing.
edike vt To educate*, to bring up. Well-bred,
educated*.
edisyon an n Edition*.
efarouche vt To frighten.
efas la n Eraser. V gòm.
efase vt To erase.
efè a 1
n Effect*, consequence. An efè Indeed.
Tretman an pa fè efè The treatment didn’t have any
effect.
efè a 2
n Belongings.
efektivman adv Effectively*.
57 E
efò a, jefò a n Effort*, endeavor. Fè efò, fè jefò
To endeavor, to strive.
èfolè a n Custard.
efondre vi To collapse, to give way.
efrayik attrib Fantastic, extraordinary, marvelous.
efreyan attrib Frightful. Ou pa si fre kon ou
efreyan You are more frightful than beautiful.
egal attrib Equal*; smooth, even (of surfaces),
level. Egal ego Evenly, equally, at par, even
Stephen. Ki pa egal Unequal.
egalize, galize vt To smooth, to even up, to
equal*, to equalize*. Ban’m rap la pou’m egalize
bwa a Give me the scraper so that I can even up
this board. Egalize cheve a bò isit Cut some more
hair on this side.
egare attrib Stupid, naive, dumbfounded, gaping,
amazed, bewildered (off the track, staggered).
Pou yo pa pran nou pou egare So that they don’t
take us for fools.
egou a, regou a n Sewer, drain.
egoyis 1
attrib Selfish.
egoyis la 2
n Egoist*; egoism.
egrè a, zegrè a n Acidity of the stomach, sour
stomach.
egzajere vi To overdo, to exaggerate*.
egzak attrib Exact*, precise, accurate.
egzakteman adv Exactly*.
egzamen an n School exam*; test; inquiry.
egzaminasyon an n Worries.
egzaminen vt To examine*, to explore, to review,
to go over, to look into, to investigate, to survey;
to ponder.
egzan attrib Exempt*. Nan pwen moun ki egzan
Nobody is exempt.
egzanp la, ezanp la n Example*. Pa egzanp For
instance.
egzante vt To spare, to avoid (exempt), to shun.
Egzante’m dezagreman Don’t give me any trouble.
egzeat la n Permit (to leave a hospital after
treatment). Lat. legal term: (Ne) exeat. Bay
egzeat To release from hospital.
egzeate vt To release from hospital. Also: bay
egzeat.
egzekite vt To carry out, to fulfill instructions; to
execute*; to kill.
egzema a n Eczema*.
egzèse vt & vi To exercise*; to practice, to
rehearse; to train. Ou ap egzèse foli You are
acting crazy.
egzèsis la n Exercise*, practice, training, drill.
Fè egzèsis To exercise, to drill, to train.
egzibisyon an n Show, exhibition*, demonstration.
egzijan attrib Demanding, difficult, hard, exacting
(said of a person who requires too much).
egzijans la n Demand.
egzije vi To demand, to insist upon.
egzijib attrib Required, necessary.
egzile vt To exile*.
egzistans la n Existence*.
egziste vi To exist*.
ekaliptis la, kaliptis la n Beakpod eucalyptus,
eucalyptus.
ekay la n Shell.
ekaymann nan n Craftsman who works with
shells.
ekè a n Square* (tool for drawing).
ekilib la n Balance, equilibrium*.
ekip la n Team. Chèf dekip Foreman (of a group
of workers).
ekipay la, kipay la, lekipay la n 1. Crew. 2. Gear
(saddle, saddle-cloth) of a horse.
ekipe vt To equip*. M’pa ekipe pou sa I am not
equipped for that.
ekiri a, lekiri a n 1. Stable, stall. 2. Groom
(stable man).
ekla a n 1. Fragment, piece. 2. Burst, outburst.
Li pati yon ekla (d)ri He burst out laughing. 3. Shoe
polish.
eklè V zeklè
eklerasyon an n Education, culture; enlightment.
eklere, klere vt To enlighten. (adj) Well-informed,
experienced, bright; brilliant, smart, clever, intelligent,
educated, civilized.
eklèsi, klèsi vt To clarify*, to lighten, to light, to
unravel (a question); to clear up.
eklips la n Eclipse*.
eklis la n Fragment, splinter.
ekòl V lekòl
èkondisyone a n Air conditioning*.
ekonomi an, ekolomi, konomi, kolomi n Savings,
economy*. Fè ekonomi To save (money).
ekonomize, konomize vt To save money, to
economize*.
ekòs la, kòs la n Bark (of a tree).
ekou a n Nut, screw*.
E 58
ekoulman an n Gonorrhea, claps (colloquial).
ekran an n Screen* (cinema).
ekri vt To write.
ekriti a, lekriti a n Handwriting, writing, penmanship;
official document. Pase ekriti To note
down, to make a record of. Cf. E. Scripture*.
ekrito a n Poster, notice, sign.
eksè a n Excess*.
eksepsyon an, esepsyon an n Exception*.
eksepte, esepte prep Except* for. Eksepte ke
Except that.
eksetera, etsetera And so forth, etc. Also: eksetera
era.
eksite vt To rouse, to arouse, to excite*, to
incite; to get excited* (from anger, enthusiasm).
ekspedisyon an, espedisyon an n 1. Shipment,
expedition*. 2. Curse. Agressive magic in which
a loa or a spirit is sent out by the houngan to
work against some person.
ekspedye, espedye vt To ship, to dispatch, to
expedite*. Also: Vodou term.
eksperyans la, esperyans la n 1. Experience*.
San eksperyans Without experience. 2. Experiment.
eksplikasyon an, esplikasyon an n Explanation,
description. Fè eksplikasyon To go in anger to
s.o. and demand an explanation for his words or
acts.
eksplike, esplike vt To explain.
eksplwate, esplwate vt To exploit*, take undue
advantage of.
ekspoze, espoze vt To expose*, to display, to
exhibit.
ekspozisyon an, espozisyon an n Display, show,
fair, exhibition. Exposition*. Fè yon eks-pozisyon
To exhibit (paintings, etc.).
ekstèminen, estèminen vt To exterminate*.
elaji V laji
elan an n Pran elan To get set.
elastik la n Rubber band. Cf. E. elastic*.
elatriye Etc., and so forth.
elefan an n Elephant*.
elegan attrib Smart, elegant*.
elegans la n Elegance*. V gangans.
eleksyon an n Election*. MORISSEAULEROY/D-5:
Lage’m avan eleksyon Set me free
before the elections.
elektrik la n Electricity*. Vil la gen elektrik The
town has electricity.
elektrisite a n Electricity*.
elektrisyen an n Electrician*.
eleman an n Element*. 2. A character (person).
elemantè attrib Elementary* (class).
elèv la n Pupil, student. Li se elèv papa’l He is a
chip of the old block; he is acting like his father.
elevasyon an, levasyon an n (pop) Education,
rearing, instruction. Poud elevasyon Yeast.
Eli n Elias*.
elikoptè a n Helicopter*, chopper.
elimine vt To eliminate*, to do away with.
elit la, lelit n Elite*
elòj la n Praise. Fè elòj To praise.
elve vt To breed, to bring up, to raise, to rear,
to train, to educate (children). Byen elve Welltrained,
polite, well brought up, well-bred. Mal elve
Rude, not properly trained, not well brought up,
unruly.
emab attrib Amiable*, friendly, kind.
eman V leman
emay la n Enamel*.
emaye attrib Enamelled*
emoraji a n Hemorrhage*.
emosyon an n Emotion*. Fè emosyon To suffer
an emotion, to get emotional.
en 1
num One. Used in set phrases, for instance:
en an, ennan One year. In a liaison, ‘en’ is pronounced
‘enn’. In counting, ‘youn’ is also used.
En, de, twa (or) youn, de, twa = One, two,
three.
en, hen 2
interj What!
enb attrib Humble*.
enben, ebyen, anben interj So, well then.
enbesil attrib Stupid, dummy, fool, imbecile*.
V sòt.
enbesilite a n Foolishness.
enbetan V anbetan
enbete V ebete, anbete
ende V ede
endèks la n Index* finger. Also: dwèt jouda.
endepandan attrib Independent*.
endepandans la, lendependans n Independence*.
endesan attrib Indecent* (of persons), improper,
lewd.
endesans la n Indecency*.
endiferan attrib Indifferent.*
59 E
endiferans la n Indifference*.
endigo V digo
endijan attrib Indigent*, very poor.
endijès attrib 1. Indigestible*. 2. Intolerant, irritable
(person).
endijestyon an, endijesyon n Indigestion*.
endikasyon an n Direction, indication*.
endike vt To indicate*. (Also a variant of ‘edike’).
endirèkteman adv Indirectly*.
endiskrè attrib Indiscreet*.
endispoze vt 1. To make nauseous. To upset
(emotionally). 2. To faint, to get ill. Indisposed*.
endispozisyon an n Sudden sickness; fit, stroke,
loss of consciousness, fainting spell, attack (illness).
Indisposition*. Li fè yon sèl en-dispozisyon
yè swa; li manke mouri. Se nan bouch lanmò li sòti
He had a violent attack last night. (He passed out)
and almost died. He escaped from the fangs of death.
endistri a n Industry*.
endividi a, dividi a n An individual*, a character.
endiyasyon an n Indignation*.
endiye attrib Indignant*, angry, outraged.
endont attrib Untamed, not broken in (animal).
Chwal endont A horse that has not been broken in.
V donte.
endyèn nan n Printed calico, Indian* cloth.
enèji a n Energy*.
enèvan an, nèvan attrib Irritating.
enève, nève vt To upset, to get on s.o.’s nerves*,
to irritate.
enfeksyon an n Infection*.
enfekte vt To infect*.
enferyè attrib Lower (in quality); inferior*; vulgar,
unrefined, contemptible, gross, rude.
enfim attrib Cripple, sickly, infirm*. V estropye.
Li enfim depi aksidan oto a He has been a cripple
since the car accident.
enfimyè a n Nurse (for sick people). Metye
enfimyè Nursing.
enflamasyon an, anflamasyon n Swelling, infla-
mation*.
enfliyans la n Influence*.
enfòmasyon an n Information*. Pran enfòmasyon
To enquire, to inquire.
enfòme vt To inform*; to acquaint, to notify; to
inquire.
enfranjit la, lenfranjit la n An illness characterized
by swollen feet.
enganm attrib Elegant, alert, in good shape, in
good health. Cf. anfòm.
engra attrib Ungrateful, unthankful. Cf. E. Ingrate*.
engratitid la, lengratitid n Ingratitude*.
enhen Yes, O.K..
èni an n Hernia*. V maklouklou.
enjenyè a n Engineer, architect.
enji a n Insult.
enjis attrib Unfair, unjust*.
enjistis la, lenjistis n Injustice*.
enkapab attrib Unfit, incompetent.
enkomode vt To inconvenience (i.e. to be injurious
to s.o.’s health). Lafimen an te enkomode’m
The smoke made me feel sick.
enkonduit la, lenkonduit n Improper behavior.
Se lenkonduit ki mete’l la His bad conduct* put him
in that position.
enkoni attrib Unknown. Cf. pwa enkoni.
enkonpetan attrib Incompetent*.
enkonpetans la n Incompetence*.
enkonsekan attrib Carefree, listless, inconsequen-
tial.
enkonsolab attrib Inconsolable*.
enkonsyan attrib Unrealistic, listless.
enkonvenyan an n Hindrance, problem, incon-
venience*.
enkoutab attrib Stubborn, disobedient.
enkoutan attrib Stubborn, disobedient.
enkredil attrib Sceptic, incredulous*.
enkriminen vt To incriminate*.
enkwayab attrib Unbelievable, incredible*.
enkwayan an n Unbeliever, atheist.
enkyè attrib Concerned, worried, anxious, preoc-
cupied.
enkyetan attrib Worrisome.
enkyete vt To worry. To be worried, preoccupied,
restless.
enkyetid la, lenkyetid n Worry, concern, anxiety,
restlessness.
énmi an, lelmi, lénmi, elmi n Enemy*, foe,
adversary.
enpas la n 1. Blind alley, no through street,
cul-de-sac. 2. Situation without an apparent so-
lution.
enpasyan attrib Impatient*, eager.
E 60
enpasyans la n Impatience*, eagerness. Ak enpasyans
Impatiently*, eagerly.
enpe, en pe A little, some, somewhat, a few, a bit
of; many, much.
enpè a n Blunder. Komèt yon enpè To commit a
blunder.
enpètinan attrib Impertinent*.
enpètinans la n Impertinence*.
enpi V epi
enpo a n Tax.
enposib attrib Impossible*.
enpòtan attrib Important*.
enpòtans la n Importance*.
enpòte vt To import*.
enpoze vt 1. To impose*. Ou pa kab enpoze’m
volonte’w You can’t impose your will on me. 2. To
forbid, to prohibit, to hinder, to prevent. Respekte
leta pa enpoze’n sèvi Bondye Having respect for the
State doesn’t prevent us from serving God.
enpresyon an, lenpresyon n Impression*.
enpridan attrib Imprudent*. Careless.
enpridans la n Imprudence*. Fè enpridans To
expose one’s self to sickness.
enprime vt To print*.
enprimri a n Printing* plant.
ensandi a n Fire, conflagration, blaze.
ensèten an, lensèten attrib Uncertain*.
ensètitid la, lensètitid n Incertitude*, uncertainty*.
ensidan an n Incident*.
ensilt la n Insult*, affront, abuse.
ensilte vt To insult*, to abuse.
ensipòtab attrib Unbearable.
ensiste vi To Insist*.
ensiswatil Amen.
ensiyifyan attrib Stupid, worthless.
enskri vt To register, to write in, to enroll, to
inscribe*.
enskripsyon an n Registration.
ensolan attrib Impertinent, insolent*, impudent,
scornful, insulting (applies to persons).
ensolans la n Insolence*.
ensolanste a n Insolence*, insult*.
ensolanstri a n Insolence*, impertinence, disrespect.
More frequently heard is ensolanste.
enspeksyon an n Inspection*.
enspekte vt To inspect*, to survey.
enspektè a n Inspector*.
enstalasyon an n 1. Installation. 2. Facilities.
enstale vt 1. To install* (in office). 2. To settle
down. Lò m’fin enstale, m’a envite’w lakay. When
I’m settled, I’ll invite you to come to my house.
3. To knock down. Si ou fè’m fache, m’a enstale’w
ak yon kou If you get me angry, I’ll knock you
down on the ground. 4. To install* one’s self.
ensten an, lensten n Instinct*.
enstriksyon an, lenstriksyon n Instruction*, ed-
ucation.
enstriman an n Instrument*.
enstrui, enstwi attrib Instructed*, learned, educat-
ed.
entak attrib Intact*.
entansyon an, lentansyon n Intention*, design.
entatad attrib Senile, gaga.
entèdi vt To forbid, to ban.
entèji vt To stun, to startle, to render numb.
entèl indef pron So and so. Entèl te vini yè? Did
so and so (you know who) come yesterday? Ordinarily,
“intèl” is used for females.
entelektyèl la n Intellectual*.
entelijan attrib Clever, wise, intelligent*.
entelijans la n Intelligence*, understanding, in-
stinct.
entènasyonal attrib International*.
entène vt To hospitalize. Also: Entène lopital.
entèple vt To invoke, to call (a minister before
parliament).
entèprèt la n 1. Interpreter*. 2. One who is
always ready to add an explanation.
enterè a, lenterè n Interest*.
enteresan attrib 1. Interesting*, important, profitable,
amusing. 2. Fè enteresan To act big, to show
off, to put on airs, to try to be funny.
enterese vt To interest*. To interest* one’s self
in. Interested*.
enteroje vt To interrogate*, to cross-examine, to
question.
enteronp vt To interrupt*.
entesten an n Intestine*.
entèvyouve vt To interview*.
entim attrib Intimate*.
entimide vt To intimidate*.
entimite a n Intimacy*.
61 E
entorije vt To oblige, to compel.
entrig la n Intrigue*, plot.
entrigan an n Schemer, intriguer*.
entrouvab attrib Hard to find, not to be found.
entyò V etyò
envalid la, envalib la 1
n Invalid*, cripple.
envalid, envalib 2
attrib Idle, lazy.
envansyon an n Invention*.
envante vt To invent*, to devise.
envantè a n Inventory*.
envazyon an n Invasion*.
envesti vt To invest*.
envitasyon an n Invitation*.
envite 1
vt To invite*.
envite a 2
n Guest.
envite 3
V evite
envizib 1
attrib Invisible*.
envizib la 2
n Invisible spirits, ancestors, the
spiritual world.
epa V apa
epav la n Idle person, drifter, one who has no
home, no occupation, and who is always at s.o.
else’s house.
epay la n Savings. Fè epay To save, to economize.
epe a, nepe a, lepe a n Sword.
epè, epe attrib Thick.
epeng V zepeng
epesè a n Thickness.
epi 1
, enpi conj And, then, and thereupon.
epi 2
mayi a, zepi a n Ear of corn.
epidemi an, pidemi an n Epidemic*.
epis la, zepis la n Spice*. Manje a gen anpil epis
The food is spicy.
epitou, epi tou conj Therefore, as a matter of
fact.
eple vt 1. To spell*. 2. To read with difficulty.
epòk la, lepòk n Time, epoch*, period. Nan
chak epòk In each period.
eponj la n Sponge*.
epouste vt To dust, to rub down.
eprèv la, zeprèv n 1. Trials and tribulations,
hardship. 2. Printing proofs.
ere attrib Happy.
erè a, lerè n Mistake, error*. Nan lerè (or) Nan
erè In error. Fè erè To be mistaken, to be abused,
to err*.
erente attrib Exhausted, very tired. Pa leve bagay
lou; ou a erente Don’t lift anything heavy; you’ll
sprain yourself.
erèz attrib (fem) Happy.
erèzman adv Fortunately, luckily.
erèzte a n Happiness.
eritaj la, leritay n Inheritance*.
erite vt To inherit*.
eritye a n Heir*.
Eròp, Leròp n Europe*. An Eròp In Europe.
erozyon an n Erosion*.
esans la n Essence*. Extract.
esè a n Attempt, experimentation, trial (tryout).
Te’m fè yon esè Let me give it a try.
èsès Fè yon moun mache èsès To make s.o. tow the
line.
esetera V etsetera
eseyay la n Fitting of clothes, shoes, etc.
eseye, seye vt To try, to test; to endeavor (to do
something).
eskalye a, leskalye a n Stairs. Mach eskalye Step.
eskandal la, skandal la n Scandal*, uproar. Fè
skandal To cause a scandal.
eskandalè, skandalè attrib Noisy, uproarious.
eskandalèz attrib Uproarious, loud; (usu) used
with female beings.
eskanp la n Crease, fold(s) of the trousers. Afòs
m’mete’l, pantalon an pèdi eskanp li I had worn my
pants so much that they had lost their crease.
eskanpe attrib Creased. Pantalon an byen eskanpe
The trousers are well creased.
eskapilè a, skapilè a n Scapular*.
èske Introductory phrase used to form questions.
Its use is optional. It corresponds to the English
auxiliary ‘do’ (does). Pòl, èske ou vle manje
konnyeya? Paul, do you want to eat now?
eskente attrib Very tired, exhausted.
eskive vt To dodge, to elude, to avoid.
eskiz la n Apology, excuse*. Fè eskiz To beg for
pardon, to say one is sorry.
eskize vt To excuse*, to pardon. Eskize, wi!
Please excuse me, I am leaving.
esklann nan n Row, scandal, commotion.
E 62
esklav la n Slave*. M’te trò esklav travay la,
m’kite sa I was too tied down (dedicated) to that
job, so I quit.
esklavaj la, lesklavaj n Slavery*. Mete nan esklavaj
To enslave*.
eskonbrit la n Mess, noise, commotion.
eskont la n Advance payment of salary (at a
discount*). Anplwaye a nan eskont The employee
regularly gets paid in advance (suffering a discount).
eskonte 1
vi To intend (to), to expect (to), to
hope.
eskonte 2
vi To get (paid) one’s salary in advance
(less a discount*).
eskòpyon V skòpyon
eskòt la n 1. Escort*. 2. An association of loas,
related or otherwise, who assist each other in
their work (COURLANDER).
eskòte vt To escort*.
eskout V skout
eskwad la n Squad*, squadron* (group of soldiers,
workers, etc.) V kòve, koumbit.
esoufle attrib Panting, short-winded.
espadon an n Swordfish.
Espay, Lespay n Spain*.
espant la n Surprise blow, hard blow, cut, causing
unexpected physical damage. Pran yon espant
lan batay To receive a hard blow in a fight. Cf.
bòt.
espante attrib Astonished, overpowered, surprised;
wonderstruck, startled.
espànyòl, panyòl n Spaniard; Spanish*. Nan
panyòl In Santo Domingo, in the Dominican Republic.
espas la n Space*; gap, hole.
espè a n Expert*.
espedisyon an, ekspedisyon n Evil spell.
espedye, ekspedye vt 1. To send, to forward. Cf.
To expedite*. 2. To exorcise.
espekilatè V spekilatè
espektak V spektak
espektatè a, spektatè a n Spectator*.
esperans la n Expectation, hope.
espere vi 1. To hope, to expect, to trust. 2. (pop)
To wait for. V tann. Gen inè depi m’ap espere’w
I’ve been waiting for you an hour.
esperyans V eksperyans
espesyal, spesyal attrib Special*.
espesyalman, spesyalman adv Especially*.
espionnen vt To spy* on.
espirit la n Spiritism*. Seyans espirit Seance.
esplandè a, splandè a n Splendor*, beauty.
esplikasyon V eksplikasyon
esplike V eksplike
esplozyon an, eksplozyon an n Explosion*, blast.
Fè esplozyon To explode.
espò V spò
espòte, ekspòte vt To export*.
espoze, ekspoze vt To expose*, to exhibit.
espre adv On purpose, specially, expressly*. Yon
fètespre A voluntary act. Pa espre Purposely, on
purpose.
esprès Fè esprès To jump on a running vehicle
(car, train, etc.).
espri V lespri
espwa a, lespwa n Hope, trust.
espwennfil, springfil n Springfield* rifle.
espyon an n Spy*.
estad la, stad la n Stadium*.
estannbay, stannbay, estennbay vi To stand* by,
to wait.
estasyon V stasyon
estat V stat
estatè V statè
estati V stati
estekoun nan n 1. Second hand clothing. 2. Ser-
vant.
estèmine, estèminen vt To exterminate*.
estènen V etènue
estetoskòp la, stetoskòp la n Stethoscope*.
estimasyon an n Assessment, estimate*. Fè yon
estimasyon To give an estimate.
estime vt To esteem*.
estimè a, stimè a n Steamer*, steamship*.
estòk V stòk
estomak V lestomak
estomake, estonmake attrib To be offended, hurt.
To be angry because of injured pride, because
your feelings have been hurt. V fwase.
estòp V stòp
estope V stope
estrad la n Platform, stage.
estravagan attrib Extravagant*.
estravagans la n Extravagance*.
63 F
estròdinè, estraòdinè attrib Unusual, extraordi-
nary*.
estropye, stropye vt To maim, to cripple, to
mutilate.
estwòdè a n Show-off, pompous ass.
estyèm, etchyèm interj Kerchoo! (onom).
V etènue.
eta a 1
n State*, condition. Liv la an movèz eta
The book is in bad condition. Eta sivil la Registry
office (of births, marriages, etc.). Ofisye eta sivil
Registrar of vital statistics (births, marriages, etc.).
eta 2
V leta
etabli a, tabli a 1
n Workbench.
etabli, tabli 2
vt 1. To establish*. 2. To settle
down. 3. To cohabit with a woman.
etaj la, letaj n Floor, storey. A letaj On the first
floor. Kay la gen senk etaj The house has five
floors.
etajè a, letajè a n Shelf.
etale vt 1. To spread. Li etale machandiz yo sou
trotwa a He spread the merchandise on the sidewalk.
2. To display. Li etale tout afè’l nan lari He lets
everybody know his business. 3. To knock down.
M’a etale ou I’ll floor you (knock you down).
etalon an n Stallion*.
etan 1
V letan
etan, antan 2
conj While (at the time when).
Etan n’ap di sa, nou bese tèt nou While saying that,
we bow our heads. V detan.
etanda a n Standard*, banner.
etandòt And so many others.
etann, tann vt To extend*, to stretch out.
etanp la n Branding iron, stamp.
etanpe V tanpe
Etazini n United States*.
ete a, lete n Summer. An ete In the summer.
eten an, leten an, ten an n Tin*.
etenn, tenyen vt To put out (extinguish*) a fire;
to turn out, to switch off (light).
etensèl la, tensèl la n Spark.
etènue, etènye, estènen, etennen vi To sneeze,
to snort (animals).
eti, ti interj Please! Yes! (in answer to a call). Cf.
plètil.
etid la n Study*; education. Yo fè anpil etid They
have studied a great deal.
etidyan an n Student*.
etidye vt To study*; to examine, to consider.
etikèt la, letikèt n Sticker, label. Cf. E. ticket*.
etòf la n Cloth; stuff*.
etone vt To amaze. To be amazed, surprised,
astonished.
etoudisman an, toudisman an n Dizziness, vertigo.
etoufman an n Suffocation.
etranj attrib Strange*.
etranje 1
attrib Foreign, imported.
etranje a 2
n Foreigner; guest; stranger*. Aletranje
Abroad, in foreign countries.
etriye a, zetriye a n Stirrup*.
etsetera, eksetera, esetera, etc adv Et cetera, etc.
Also: etsetera era.
etwa, etwat, etwèt attrib Narrow, tight. Cf. E.
Strait*. V jis.
etwal V zetwal
etyò, entyò, entchò attrib Bourik etyò A large
donkey kept for breeding.
evakue, evakwe vt To evacuate*.
evanjil n Gospel.
evantay la, vantay n Fan (hand held device
cooling the air near one’s face).
evapore vi To evaporate*. Lèt evapore Evaporated
milk.
evèk la n Bishop. V monseyè.
evénman an, levénman n A (rare) event*, happening;
calamity. Provèb la di: Nèg sòt se evénman
The saying goes: A stupid person is a terrible
thing.
evite, envite vt To avoid*, to spare; to avert.
evolue, evolye vi To develop, to evolve*.
eyè a, zeye a n Carnation.
ezeman adv Easily*.
Ézili, Zili n Erzulie* (goddess). Ézili-je-rouj is
evil. Ézili-Freda is benevolent.
ezitasyon an n Hesitation*, hesitancy*.
ezite vi To hesitate*, to sway.
F
fa a 1
n Make-up (for the face). Fard*.
fa a 2
n Lighthouse.
fab la n Fable*, fairy-tale, a made-up story,
product of the imagination, joke.
F 64
fabrik la n Factory.
fache attrib Angry, discontented. Pa fache pou sa
Don’t take offense at that. Sa fè’m fache anpil That
infuriates me. Fache ak To fall out with. Koupe
fache To break off relations, or a friendship.
fachin nan n (single) Faggot, small branches of
dry wood. Fascine*.
fachman an n Falling out (rupture of relationship);
anger, discontent.
fad attrib Tasteless, insipid, boring. (usu) Applied
to insufficiently spiced food, without enough salt.
Jodi a manje a fad, li pa gen bon gou Today, the
food is tasteless, it doesn’t have a good taste.
fade vi To put on make-up.
fado a n Load, burden.
faksyon an n Guard duty.
faksyonnè a n Sentry.
faktè a n Postman, letter-carrier, mail carrier,
mailman.
fakti a n Bill, invoice.
faktori a n Americanism for the more usual
izin.
fal la n 1. Gizzard; front, chest, belly, crop (of
birds). 2. Bib (of clothing). Pa pote fal ou
Don’t expose yourself (to danger). Be careful. Fal
mwen plen I am full (satiated).
falèz la n Cliff, precipice.
famasi a, fanmasi, fonmasi n Pharmacy*, drugstore.
Kouto famasi Two-faced hypocrit.
famasyen an, fonmasyen an n Pharmacist*, drug-
gist.
familyarite a n Familiarity*. Ou fè tròp familyarite
avè’l You are too familiar with him.
fanal la, fannal la n Lantern. Also: Part of a
calabash cut at the top in which a candle is
placed (stuck in a little mud) and placed in the
sea so that the fisherman may see the fish at
night. Also: A type of cardboard lantern used
around Christmas time and carried in the streets.
It has designs cut out of the cardboard, particularly
in the Jérémie area, where kids parade
them, shouting ‘Viv Nwèl’.
fanatik la n Fan, fanatic*.
fanbre attrib Woman chaser, womanizer.
fandanman attrib Spoiled, smelly (meat). V foun-
dang.
fane, fannen vi To fade, to wither.
fanm nan n Woman; wife; mistress. V fi. Fanm
kay The woman that you regularly live with (either
legally married or as a concubine) as opposed to
‘fanm deyò’, ‘fanm sou kote’ (mistress). Fanm marye
(Legal) wife as opposed to ‘fanm plase’. Outside
this context, ‘wife’ is translated by ‘madanm’.
Mete fanm sou ou Act with determination as a
mature woman.
fanmi an, fami an, lafanmi n Family*. Kin,
relative(s). Se yon afè lafanmi It’s a family affair.
Se fanmi’m It’s a relative of mine.
fanmitay la n Family relationships.
fanmòt la n Effeminate, pusillanimous man;
weakling like a woman; sissified man.
fanmsay la, fanmsaj, famsay, fanmchay n Midwife.
Also: sajfam, akouchèz.
fann vt To split, to crack, to burst (open), to
break open, to divide, to part. Pòt la fann The
door is cracked. Pobouch ou fann You have chapped
lips. Nouvèl la fann kè’m That news breaks my
heart. Fann vant To make an operation on the
stomach. Ke fann Coat with a vent. vi To take to
one’s heels, to dash off. M’fann dèyè’l I went
after him. Fann nan siyay yon moun To follow in
s.o.’s trail; to go after.
fannal V fanal
fannen V fane
fant la n Crack, opening, fissure, crevice, split,
gap. M’wè’l nan fant pòt la I see him from the
opening in the door.
fantezi a n Whim, fancy*.
farandolè a n Braggart, pompous ass.
farin nan n Flour. Farin frans Wheat flour.
Farin Ginen Powder used to draw the ceremonial
‘vèvè’. Farin mayi Corn flour. Farin manyòk
Tapioca. Farin diri Rice powder.
farinay la n Light rain, drizzle, mist. Also: farinay
lapli.
farinen, farine vi To drizzle, to be misty. Kite’m
al lakay mwen, lapli ap farinen Let me go home;
there is a slight drizzle. (It’s raining lightly).
farizyen an n Hypocrit.
farouche, efarouche vt To frighten.
fas la 1
n Face*. Fas pou fas (or) Fas a fas Face
to face. An de fas Two-faced, hypocritically. Bay
fas To face. An fas Opposite. Ou pa fouti kanpe
an fas mwen pou ou pale konsa You couldn’t face
up to me and talk that way.
fas la 2
n Farce*, joke. Pa pran’m fè fas Don’t
fool around with me, don’t kid around with me.
fasad la n Front, facade*. Kay la gen bèl fasad
men li pa solid The house has a pretty front, but
it’s not very sturdy.
fasè a n Joker, undependable.
fasi vt To stuff (food).
fasil attrib Easy, facile*; easygoing. (adv) Easily.
65 F
fasilite 1
vt To give, to make something available
to s.o.
fasilite 2
a n Ease. Ak fasilite Easily.
fason an n Way, manner.
fatig la n Fatigue*, tiredness.
fatigan attrib Strenuous, tiresome, tiring, fatigu-
ing*.
fatige vt To tire, to tire out; to get tired, to get
weary. Ou fatige’m You’re making me tired; you’re
boring me; you’re pestering me. Pa fatige kò’w
1. Don’t tire yourself out. 2. Don’t worry.
fatra a n 1. Waste matter, garbage, trash, rubbish,
junk, filth, refuse. 2. (fig) Low, despicable per-
son.
favè a n Favor*. Li fè’m anpil favè, fòk mwen
ride’l jodi a He did me a lot of favors; I have to help
him today.
fay V flay
faya Tonbe faya To be exhausted, to be down and
out.
fayans la n China, crockery (refined pottery
originally from Faenza, Italy).
fayit la n Bankruptcy*. Fè fayit To go bankrupt,
to fail.
fayminit adv Fast, in a jiffy, in just five minutes*.
fe a 1
n Energy, urge, drive (pep), fire*. Kase fe
To break s.o.’s back (will, energy).
fe a 2
n Ridge (of a house).
fè 1
vt 1. To do, to make, to perform, to produce,
to provide; to manufacture, to achieve. 2. To
take in (money). 3. To read, to learn (law,
etc.) 4. To give birth. 5. To have sex. 6. To
stay, to spend. Examples and expressions: M’te
fè de jou Jakmèl I stayed two days in Jacmel. Anpil
lan boutik yo te konn fè de san dola pa jou Many of
the stores used to take in two hundred dollars a day.
Fè lanmou To make love. Fè debon To be pregnant.
Fè byen (or) Fè dibyen To be beneficial to s.o. To
be good for s.o. Fè mal To hurt. Fè yon moun ri
To make s.o. laugh. Fè sa pou mwen Do that for
me. Sa l’fè l’fè Come what may. Fè manti To tell a
lie. Fè pitit To beget, to have children, to multiply.
Lajan nan labank fè pitit Money in the bank grows.
Fè tèt To give (or) to get a haircut. Fè sanblan
To make out, to pretend. Fè pa’m Give me a
chance. Li fè, li fè jis li pèdi He kept on and on till
he lost. Fè devwa To fulfill one’s duty. M’fè yon
rèv I had a dream. L’ap fè ledwa He is reading
(studying) law. Pran yon moun fè blag Not to take
someone seriously; to make fun of. Fè lapenn To
hurt, to cause sorrow, grief, distress. Fè fre It’s
cool. (In this example, ‘fè’ is an impersonal
verb).
fè a 2
n 1. Iron (metal). Li chich pase do kiyè fè
He’s stingier than hell. (A wooden spoon might
give something, but nothing sticks to the iron
spoon). 2. Iron (for pressing clothes). Pase fè
sou yon ròb To iron a dress. A fè is called karo
in some parts of Haiti.
fè a, fèt la 3
n Fact*.
fèb attrib Weak, delicate, faint. Feeble*. M’fèb
pou sigarèt mwen Cigarettes are my weakness; I am
partial to cigarettes.
fèblan an n Tin can; tin-plate, metal container.
fèblantye a n Tinsmith.
fèblès la, feblès la n Weakness; anemia, fainting,
swoon. Tonbe feblès To swoon from hunger, illness,
etc.
febli vi To weaken, to lose strength.
fedatifis la n Fireworks.
fèfòje a n Wrought-iron.
fèk, fenk aux v To have just. V ferenk. Li te fèk
fèt He was just born. M’fèk di sa I just said that.
Fèk kare To make a fresh start (after having been
at it for a long time). Chantè a fèk kare chante
The singer has been singing for a long time (and
now he is starting with greater vehemence).
fekal attrib Faecal*. Only in matyè fekal, faecal
matter, stool (medical term).
fele vi To crack, to fracture. Cracked, fragile.
Vè a fele; pa bwè ladan’l That glass is cracked;
don’t drink from it. Tifi sa a se ze fele; pa jwe avè’l
That girl is very fragile; don’t play with her. Even
when she is touched lightly, she cries.
fèm 1
attrib Firm*, steady, solid, sturdy, strong,
fresh. Kenbe fèm Hold tight.
fèm nan 2
n 1. Farm*. 2. Lease.
fèmante vi To ferment*.
fèmay la n Annual rent, Farm* rent.
femèl la, fenmèl la n Female* (Refers to animals).
Femèl chat Pussy cat. Femèl chen Bitch. Femèl
bourik Jenny ass. Femèl kochon Sow.
fèmen 1
attrib Shy.
fèmen 2
vt 1. To close, to shut, to shut in, to
stop. 2. To imprison. 3. To close in, to hem in
(to prevent s.o. from passing). Fèmen ak kadna
To padlock. Li fèmen kò’l nan yon kwen He confines
himself; he isolates himself.
fen an 1
n End. San fen Endless, ceaseless,
incessant, infinite*. Lan fen fon In the very depths
of, in the thick of, in the furthermost part. Fen dane
Year’s end. Alafen In the end, at last, finally.
Alafendèfen (or) Anfennkont In the final analysis;
when everything is said and done; at long last,
finally. Mete yon fen (lan) (or) Fè yon fen (ak)
To terminate, to put an end (to).
F 66
fen, fin 2
attrib 1. Thin. 2. Fine*, delicate, refined,
beautiful. Zèl yo te fin The wings were delicate.
3. Dressed up, elegant, smart. (adv) Impeccably,
beautifully.
fenèt la, fennèt la n Window, window-frame.
feneyan, fenyan attrib 1. Lazy, good-for-nothing,
sluggish. 2. Cowardly, lightheartedly.
fenk V fèk
fenn vt To feign*, to make out.
fennen vi 1. To fade, to wither. 2. (fig) To be
shabby. FARDIN-17: Tifi jamè fatige, jamè fennen
She was never tired, never shabby. Flè a pa rouze,
li fennen The flower has not been watered; it has
faded.
fenomèn nan n ‘Character’, one who commits
stupid, incredible acts.
fent la n Ruse, stratagem, trickery, feint*. Ti
gason sa a gen fent That boy is tricky; he needs
watching.
fente vi To pretend, to be tricking.
fentè attrib Cunning, tricky, devious.
fènwa a, fènwè a n Darkness; ignorance. V labrin.
fenyan V feneyan
feray la n Scrap iron.
feraye vi To work hard.
fere vt To shoe (a horse). To put cleats on
shoes. Pye fere Calloused feet. Fere lèt To dip a
piece of iron into a bowl of milk in order to protect
children from diarrhea.
fèrenk, ferenk aux v To have just; scarcely. Li
fèrenk sòti He just left. (Used mostly in the
North). V fèk.
feròs attrib Fierce, ferocious*.
fese vt To throw down, to hurl to the ground
(in a fight). Chwal la fese’l sou do The horse
threw him on his back.
festibal V fistibal
fet n Felt*. Soulye fet Felt shoe.
fèt 1
attrib 1. (To be) born. 2. To take place, to
occur, to happen. 3. Made, done, produced.
Fèt e founi Labor and material. Se konsa pou sa ta
fèt That’s how that should be done. Ou pa fèt pou
ou travay le dimanch You are not supposed to work
on Sunday. Ki poko fèt Unborn. MORISSEAULEROY/D-7:
Sa fèt vre That really happened.
fèt la 2
n 1. Party, feast*. 2. Anniversary. 3. Holiday.
Se yon jou fèt It’s a day of celebration. Fè fèt To
celebrate, to feast.
fèt la, fè a 3
n Fact*. Se yon fèt akonpli It’s all
over with.
fetay la n 1. Crest, rafters, ridge, ridge-piece in a
house where the staves come together on the
ceiling. 2. (pop) Eaves. Nonm nan pann tèt li
nan fetay kay la The man hanged himself on the
cross pieces of the open ceiling.
fètdèmò n All Souls’ day.
fete vt To feast*, to celebrate.
fètefouni, fèt e founi Everything included (labor
and material).
fètekòz Pran fètekòz pou To take sides with.
fetich la n Charm, fetich*.
fetyè a n Ridge-piece (of a house).
fevriye n February*.
fèy la n 1. Leaf. 2. Sheet, page. 3. Often accompanies
the name of a flat object. Fèy planch
Board, plank*. Fèy liv Page of a book. Yon fèy
zòrèy An ear. Fèy kat A playing card. Kase fèy
kouvri sa Let’s forget about it, let it be, let’s just
cover it up.
feyay la n Al lan feyay To consult the ‘dòktè fèy’,
herb doctor.
fezè a, fèzè a 1
n Scandal-monger, enterprizing
(pej), braggart. Fezè jan ou kapab, se pa pase
jako No matter how much you exaggerate, you won’t
beat the parrot.
fezè a, fèzè a 2
n Maker, producer. FAYO-155:
Fezè nat fè nat, li dòmi atè The mat-maker makes
mats, yet he sleeps on the ground.
fèzèdmal, fèzèmal n Evildoer.
fi a, fiy la Woman.
fich la n Ticket, slip, token.
fidèl attrib True, faithful, loyal.
fif M’nan fif ou I am going to get you. V fiftiwann.
fifiy la n Maiden, young girl.
fiftiwann n Buttocks. M’nan fiftiwann ou I am
going to get you.
fig la n Banana. Also: fig bannann. Fig Frans:
fig.
Figaro n Figaro. Se kòkòt ak Figaro They are
inseparable friends.
figi a 1
n Face; figure*. Roze figi To make up, i.e.
to enbellish one’s face with make-up. M’pap achte
figi I’m not saying it just to please you; I mean it.
Mare figi To frown, to put on an angry face.
figi a 2
n Picture cards (kings, queens and
jacks).
figire vpr To imagine, to figure*.
figye modi, figye maron n Autograph tree; fig*
tree (wild fig). Clusia rosea Jacq.
fiks attrib Firm, fixed*, permanent. (adv) Intently,
fixedly*.
67 F
fikse, fiske vt To stare at, to fix* one’s gaze
upon. FAYO-368: Si ou pa tap fiske lesyèl, ou pa
tap wè lezetwal ap desann If you were not looking
at the sky, you wouldn’t know that the stars were
falling.
fil la 1
n Hymen, maidenhead (cherry).
fil la 2
n Thread, line, yarn, string, fiber. Fil fè,
filfè Wire, barbed wire. Fil a plon, filaplon Plumb*
line. Plòt fil Ball of thread. Mango fil Type of
mango full of fibers (stringy). Fil vis Thread of a
screw. Fil arenyen Cobweb. Pran fil To get to
know one’s way around. Pran lan fil To con, to
trap. Pèdi fil To lose one’s influence, one’s position.
Bay fil To give (s.o.) the proper connections.
filacha a n Brass wire, binding wire.
filalang, lafilalang Fè filalang To stick one’s tongue
at someone, to tempt, to mock. L’ap fè’m filalang
He eats in such a manner (purposely) so as to make
my mouth water.
filaligati a n Binding wire, flexible wire used in
construction work.
filanegui One thing leading to another, progres-
sively.
filang nan n Tiny slices (strands of meat, etc.).
Rad li filang His clothes are tattered.
filange vt 1. To slice very thin. To notch. V dole.
2. To give s.o. a severe thrashing, to beat him
badly.
filas attrib Thread-like. Cheve filas Very thin fine
hair.
filati a n Weaving factory, spinning mill.
filbobin nan n Bisexual.
file 1
attrib Sharp. Kouto a pa file The knife is not
sharp (or) The knife is dull. File kon razwa
Sharp as a razor.
file 2
vt 1. To sharpen, to file*. 2. To spin
(yarn). 3. To slip away, to dash off. 4. To
court. 5. To stick through (thread in a needle).
6. To follow, to watch, to prepare to catch (a
criminal). 7. To meet out (thread, rope). (With
the Creole verb ‘file’, we have a concomitance
of Fr. filer, afiler). Examples and expressions:
File move koton To be on the wrong track. File
kouto To sharpen a knife. File cat To deal cards.
File zegi To thread a needle. Kat la mal file
There is a misdeal. Yo tap file vòlè a depi lontan
They watched and followed the thief closely for a
long time. Andre file yon kòd anba pou Pyè ka
monte Andrew let a rope come down so that Peter
could climb up. File zepon ou Get ready for the
task, i.e. sharpen your spurs. vi To shoot (star);
to go fast. M’wè yon zetwal ki file I just saw a
shooting star.
filè a 1
n Suitor.
filè a, filèt la 2
n 1. Net (fish, hair, tennis, etc.).
2. Filet* (food).
filèt la n 1. Hymen. 2. Yon filèt ronm: A finger
of rum. V filè.
filfè a, fil fè a n Barbed wire. Filfè ligati Bind
wire (very thin wire used for binding).
film nan, fim nan n Film*, roll of film (photography);
picture (movies, cinema).
filozòf la n Philosopher*. Pa fè filozòf ou sou
mwen Don’t act high hat with me.
filozofi a, filo a n Philosophy*. One additional
year of schooling after ‘retorik’ (which is the
last year of high school). Bouki fè filozofi Now
everyone is enlightened. Today there are no more
fools.
filt la n Filter*.
filyè a n 1. Screw-thread. Boulon an pa gen filyè
The bolt is not threaded. 2. Connections, manner.
M’pa wè pa ki filyè pou m’pase pou’m ka jwenn
dyòb la I don’t see how I’m going to get that job.
fim V film
fimen vt To smoke.
fimye a n Manure.
fin aux v Auxiliary denoting the termination of
an action. (As a shortened form of ‘fini’, the
word ‘fin’ is never placed at the end of a sentence).
Ou fin bout You have reached your limit. V fini.
finach Se finach That’s final, that’s it.
final adv An final Finally*.
finalman adv Finally*.
finans la n Finance*.
finès la n Elegance, finesse*; fine quality mer-
chandise.
fini, fin vt To end, to finish*, to end up with, to
destroy; to expire; to run out; to exterminate.
V fin. Pitit ou fin gran Your children are grown
up. Fèt la prèt pou fini The party is about to end.
Mal pou fini To drag along. Kijan sa fini? How
did it all end? (‘Fini’ can be made more emphatic
by the addition of ‘nèt’).
finisman an n End, ending, finish*. Nan finisman
istwa a nou aprann li mouri At the end of the story,
we learned that he died.
fisèl la n String, twine.
fiske V fikse
fistibal la, festibal, pistibal n Sling (shot).
fiy V fi
fiyansay la n Betrothal. Engagement (to marry).
fiyanse 1
vi To become engaged.
fiyanse a 2
n Bridegroom; bride, fiancé*.
fiydonè a, fidonè a n Bridesmaid.
F 68
fiyèl la, fiyòl la n Godson, goddaughter, godchild.
Tout fiyòl mwen se fi All my godchildren are girls.
fiyèt lalo a n A woman character in Haitian
folklore. This word has been used in a political
context these past few years.
fiyòl V fiyèl
fizi a n Rifle, gun.
fizik la n Physics*; physique*.
fiziye, fizye vt To execute with a rifle; to shoot
(even in its vulgar meaning).
flach la n Flash* light, flash lamp. Anpoul flach
Flash bulb.
flache vt To throw the light on someone. To
flash*.
flakon an n Bottle, phial, flask*.
flaman an, flanman an n 1. Flamingo* (bird).
2. Type of big ant. Flanman rouj Type of red ant.
flan an n Side, flank*.
flanban adv Flanban nèf: Brand new.
flanbe vt To singe, to apply a flame* to something
(to sterilize a needle, to singe the down on poultry,
etc.). To go up in flames.
flanbwayan an n Flame tree (Flamboyant*).
Royal Poinciana, Delonix Regia (Bojer) Raf.
flanèl la, flannèl la n Flannel*.
flanke, flank vt To fling, to throw, to sprawl; to
give (slap, blow, etc.). M’flanke’l yon souflèt I
gave him a slap. M’flanke’l lajan’l I let him have
his money (because he was pestering me).
flanm nan n 1. Flame*. 2. Whiz (very brillant
person). PRESSOIR-22: Li travèse flanm ti lanp
la It was crossing the flame of the little lamp.
flanman V flaman
flann nan n Walk, stroll.
flannè a, flanè a n Idler, loafer.
flannen vi To idle along, to dawdle, to loiter, to
take a stroll, to loaf around.
flate vt To flatter*, to cajole.
flatè a n Flatterer*. (syn) Sousou, souflanchou,
achtèdfigi. V achtè.
flatri a n Flattery*.
flay vi To go by plane, to fly*.
flay, fay 1
attrib Weak, thin; light (weight). Bwat
katon sa a trò flay; m’bezwen youn ki pou kenbe
bagay ki lou That paper carton is too weak. I need
one to hold something heavy.
flay, fay 2
Fè flay To miss, to fail. M’tire zwazo a
epi m’fè flay I shot at the bird and missed.
flè a n Flower*, bloom. Flè sezon An inconstant
person, one who changes with the seasons. Flè solèy
Sunflower. Fè flè To flirt. Pye mango yo an flè
The mango trees are blooming.
flèch la n 1. Arrow. 2. Stalk of some trees.
Flèch palmis The arrowlike stalk of a palm tree.
Flèch mayi The upper excressence of a corn stalk.
flechi vi To bend, to flinch*.
flègèdèk attrib Thin, meager.
flenm nan, flèm nan n Mucus, phlegm*.
fleri vi To bloom, to blossom, to flower*.
flit la 1
n Flit* (a container used to spray insecti-
cides).
flit la 2
n Flute*.
flite vt To spray insecticides with a device called
‘flit’*.
flo a n Troubles, worries, misery, suffering.
L’ap pase yon flo ak bèlmè’l He’s having so much
trouble with his mother-in-law (Pase flo = pase
tray = pase mizè). Yon flo A lot of.
flòbòp V fobo
flòch la n 1. Flush* (at cards). 2. (attrib) On
the same level. Youn flòch ak lòt They are on the
same level.
flòk attrib Baggy, loose.
flonn nan n Sling. Kon yon flonn As fast as an
arrow. Yon flonn A lot of, a great deal of.
flonnen vt To sling.
flote vi To float*, to wave. Twa kadav tap flote
sou lanmè a Three corpses were floating on the sea.
Chak jou, drapo flote sou tèt biro yo Every day, the
flags wave on the top of the offices.
fo attrib False*, fake. (Limited use; more often:
‘pa vre’). Fo cheve Wig. Fo dan Denture. Fo
non False name. Fo pèz False weight.
fò 1
attrib 1. Strong. 2. Loud. 3. Intelligent,
knowledgeable. (adv) Strongly. Koutiryèz la fò
That seamstress is really good. Li fò nan manje He
is a good eater; he eats a lot. Pi fò nan yo The
greatest portion of them, most of them. Pa pale fò
avè’m Don’t raise your voice at me. Pale fò To
speak loudly. Li santi fò He smells bad.
fò a 2
n Fort*, fortress*.
fò, fòk, ilfo 3
It is necessary (that, to). Jodi a fòk
mwen pati Today I’ll have to leave.
fobo, flòbòp, fòbòp attrib Toothless, gap-toothed.
Nonm sa a gen dyòl fobo That man has no teeth.
V kòk, mazora.
fòfè a n Bad action, evil deed, crime.
69 F
fofile vt 1. To baste, to tack. 2. Fofile kò: To
make one’s way. M’fofile kò’m nan foul moun yo
pou’m pati I made my way through the crowd in
order to leave.
fòj la n Forge*, smithy.
fòje vt 1. To forge* (a check), to invent, to
falsify. 2. To work at a blacksmith’s shop, to
forge (Rare). V fèfòje.
fòjron an, fòjon an n Blacksmith.
fòk V fò
fokòl la, fokole a n (Detachable) Collar*.
fòkòp vt To ruin, to spoil. (From E. fuck up*).
fòkseli a n Other name for veritab (breadfruit).
fòl attrib Crazy (woman).
foli a n Madness, folly*, mania. Foli damou
Love sickness.
fòlòp la n Escapade (furtive). Unauthorized
absence from one’s station of duty (milit). Cf.
chap.
fòm nan n 1. Form*, shape. 2. Shoe tree, shoe
last. Mete soulye yo nan fòm Put the shoes on the
shoe last. Pran fòm To change, to get transformed.
Bay fòm To model. An fòm In (good) shape, in
proper form.
fòmalize vi To take offense. Li fòmalize pou yon
senp plezantri He took offense at a simple joke.
fòmann nan n Foreman*.
fòme, fòmen vt 1. To form*. 2. To reach puberty.
fòmidab attrib Formidable*.
fon 1
Contraction of fè yon make one, do one.
fon 2
attrib Deep, profound*. Vin pi fon To
deepen. Dlo ki pa fon Shallow water.
fon an 3
n Bottom, depth; back. Foundation*.
Fè fon To sink, to go under. Lan fon lanmè a In
the depth of the ocean.
fon an 4
n Funds*.
fondalnatal attrib Real native (neologism). Fun-
damental.
fondasyon an n Foundation*.
fondè a, profondè a n Depth.
fondre vi To topple down.
fonksyonnè a n State employee.
fonksyonnen vi To function*, to work.
fonmasi V famasi
fonmi V foumi
fonn vi To melt, to vanish, to disappear, to
sneak away. Li fonn kon bon bè He disappeared in
a hurry; he sneaked away like smoke.
fonograf la n Phonograph*, record player.
V toundis.
fonse 1
vt 1. To hammer down, to drive into.
2. To wrinkle, to knit (one’s eyebrows). Li fonse
sousi’l He frowned. 3. To gather (a dress).
4. Fonse sou: To jump on.
fonse 2
attrib Dark, deep (color). Rouj fonse
Deep red, dark red.
fonsi a n Recess, hole.
fontèn V fontenn
fontenn nan, fontèn nan n 1. Fountain*. 2. Fontanel(le)*
of the cranium. (More usually: fontenn
tèt). 3. A white spot on the forehead of horses
and asses.
fontyè a n Border, frontier*, (national) boundary.
2. The red light district.
fopa a n Faux pas*.
fòpaplis, fò pa plis Perfect! Tops! Excellent! No
need to go further.
fopwen an n Brass knuckles.
forè a, fore a n Forest*.
fòs la 1
n Force*, strength, pressure. Li fè’l ak
fòs kouraj li He did it by his brute strength and
stamina. Li vin vòlè pa fòs Pressure and circumstances
made him a thief.
fòs la 2
n Grave, tomb, hole dug in the ground
to burry s.o. Chak ane, l’al sou fòs papa’l Every
year, he goes to his father’s grave.
fòse vt To force*; to compel, to coerce; to strain
one’s self, to force one’s self. M’te kanpe nan
koridò a; li fòse’m antre I was standing in the
corridor; he forced me to come in. Vòlè a fòse pòt la
The burglar forced the door open.
fòselye a n Grave digger.
fòsèt la, fòsèp la n Forceps*. Doktè a te oblije
pran pitit la ak fòsèt The doctor had to use forceps
in order to deliver the baby.
fòskote a n A pulling to the side, a force* that
causes a swerve.
foskouch la n Miscarriage. Fè foskouch To have
a miscarriage. Foskouch makak (Strong insult)
You’re the ugliest bastard in the world.
fòt la 1
n Fault*, guilt. Se pa fòt mwen It’s not my
fault.
fòt la, fot la 2
n Mistake, error. M’ap vini san fot
I am coming for certain.
fotèy la n Armchair.
fòtifyan an n Fortifiers* (vitamins).
fòtin nan n Fortune*, riches.
foto a n Photo*, photograph*, snapshot. Fè yon
foto To take a picture.
F 70
fotograf la n Photographer*.
fou 1
attrib Mad, crazy, insane; foolish*. Foumi
fou Type of ant which goes in all directions. Moun
fou Lunatic, crazy people. Ki pa fou Sane. Rann
fou (or) Fè fou To drive s.o. crazy. Renmen yon
moun pou fou To be crazy about s.o.
fou a 2
n Oven, furnace*.
fou a 3
n Tern (bird).
fouacho a, founacho a n Lime-kiln. V lacho.
foub la n Trickster. (attrib) Cheating, deceitful,
two-faced.
foubi vt I. To rub (down), to furbish*, to polish.
V frote. Anvan ou fè manje nan chodyè a, se pou
ou foubi’l Before you cook in that pot, rub it clean.
2. To scold. Maten an, madanm msye foubi’l byen
foubi This morning, his wife let him have it. She
really scolded him.
fouch la n Prop, fork*. V fouk. Bay bannann
nan fouch To put a prop on the banana plant.
fouchèt la n Fork*. Dan fouchèt Prongs of a fork.
foufoun nan n Vagina.
fougonnen vt To mishandle, to ruin, to handle
brutally.
foujè a n Fern*.
fouk la n 1. Fork* (place where the thighs come
together). 2. The part of the trousers that cover
this spot: crotch.
fouke vt To grab s.o. by the rear of his trousers.
Jandam nan fouke vòlè a The policeman grabbed the
thief by the pants (and marched him away).
foul 1
vt 1. To fill*. Foul tank mwen Fill my tank.
2. Full*. Tank machin mwen te foul My gas tank
was full.
foul la 2
n Crowd, mob. Yon foul A lot of, a
great number of.
foula a n Scarf, silk kerchief, foulard*.
foulay la n Sprain, strain. V fouli, antòs.
foule 1
vt To sprain, to twist. Li foule pye’l He
sprained his foot.
foule 2
vt To pile up, to compress, to pack
tightly (sack); to trample (tread) upon. Sack la
byen foule The sack is well packed. Pyero kout, li
byen foule Pierrot is short and stocky.
fouli a n Sprain, strain. V antòs, foulay.
foultitid n A lot of, lots of. DYESIFÒ: Kisa pou
li di nan mitan foultitid moun k’ap ranni tribò babò
a? What can he say in the middle of all these people
who are shouting like crazy. [Haiti-Progrès, November
23, 1988].
foumi an, fonmi an, fomi an, fro(n)mi an n
Ant. Fromi (a) zèl Winged ant. Some other
types: foumi rouj, foumi fou, foumi pikan, foumi
flanman. Common saying: M’kite yon po kann ak
tout foumi pou li.
founacho V fouacho
founda V foundang
foundang, founda attrib Spoiled, smelly (meat).
founde a n Rice flour used to make porridge in
some districts of the South of Haiti.
founen an n Ovenful.
founi vt To supply, to furnish*; to be plentiful,
thick. Founi je gade To look, to get an eyeful.
founiti a n Supplies, parts, material (as opposed
to labor).
founo a n Oven, hearth.
fouradò, fouradon V fouyadò
fouraje vi To rummage, to forage*.
fouraye, anfouraye vt To misplace.
foure vt To insert, to put, to poke, to stick (in),
to shove in, to stuff, to reach into. M’foure
men’m nan pòch mwen, m’pran yon dola I reached
into my pocket and took a dollar.
fouri a n Fur*. Manto fouri Fur coat.
fouro a n Scabbard, sheath, case. V genn.
fout 1
vt To give, to cause to have; to put, to
place. Marengwen mòde’l; yo fout li lafyèv Mosquitos
bit him; they gave him fever. Yo fout li atè They
threw him on the ground.
fout 2
interj Damn it! What! (Interjection denoting
anger). Fout! Tonnè! Damn it! To hell! Wi fout!
Wow! (denothing surprise).
foutbòl la n Soccer (not American ‘football’).
foutbolè a n Soccer player.
fouti aux v 1. May. Ou fouti tonbe Careful, you
may fall. 2. (In negative sentences) Can, to be
able. DEJEAN-64: Yo pa te fouti reponn anyen pou
sa They weren’t able to answer that at all.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-3: Nou pa fouti mouri
We can’t possibly die.
fouy la n Digging, searching. Fè fouy To dig, to
excavate.
fouyadò, fouradò, fouradon attrib Busybody;
indiscreet, meddlesome person (one who can’t
refrain from touching everything, and from meddling).
V fouyapòt.
fouyapòt, friyapòt attrib Busybody, an excessively
curious, meddlesome person, one who asks too
many questions about other people’s business;
meddler, snoopy. Nosy. V fouyadò. Nan
fouyapòt, li jwenn ak zo grann li; se sa’k pou ta
rive’l In nosing around, he got into trouble. He got
what he deserved.
fouye vt 1. To bore, to dig, to excavate. 2. To
search for, to examine thoroughly. 3. To frisk.
71 F
4. To harass with endless questions. To an inquisitive
person you say: Ase fouye’m, m’pa patat
Stop asking me so many questions. Stop digging me.
You’re not digging for sweet potatoes. V fwaye.
fouyè a n Digger, ditchdigger. Fouyè fòs Grave
digger.
frajil attrib Fragile*, delicate, brittle.
fran attrib Frank*, loyal, sincere, honorable,
straightforward, complete. Twa jou fran Three
complete days.
franj la, frany la n Fringe*.
franjipay la, franchipay la, franjipàn nan n Fran-
gipani*.
Frans V Lafrans
franse 1
attrib French*.
franse 2
a, fransè a n 1. Frenchman*, French*.
2. French* language.
fransèz la n French* woman.
frap la n Striking power, hit.
frape, fwape vt 1. To hit, to strike, to knock; to
tap; to swat, to stomp, to bump; to collide (with).
2. To affect, to strike. 3. To hurl (atè: to the
ground). Frape pye To stomp one’s feet. Bouton
frape Type of covered button. Li frape kostim nwa’l
la jodi a Today he’s wearing his black suit. Pa
frape lan pòt la Don’t knock on the door. vi 1. To
collide. De machin frape Two cars collided. 2. To
cool (a beverage). Mete koka frape nan frijidè a
Put the cokes in the refrigerator to cool.
frapman an n 1. Knocking (noise in a car).
2. Relations, activities. Se fi ki gen gro frapman
This woman is moving in high circles; she is a
heavyweight.
fraz la n 1. Sentence. 2. Joke, joking.
fre 1
attrib Fresh*, cool, fresh looking; spruced
up (person). V frèch.
fre a 2
n Smell, scent, flair*, odor. Pran fre yon
manje To sniff (smell) a dish of food.
frè a 1
n 1. Brother. 2. Fellow man; very close
relative. 3. Religious brother, friar*. Chè frè
Religious brother. MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-7: Antigòn
di se pou l’antere frè’l Antigone said she had
to bury her brother. Frè menm manman Uterine
brother (on the mother’s side only). Frè menm
papa Brother on the father’s side. Frè menm manman,
menm papa Full (blood) brother. Ti frè’m My
younger brother. Frè bra Friend like a brother.
frè a 2
n Expense. Ki moun k’ap fè frè? Who is
going to pay the expenses? Who is paying?
frèch attrib Fresh* in appearance, (usu) applied
to women or sometimes to words that in French
are of the feminine gender. Dlo fre (or) Dlo
frèch Cool water. To a woman: Ala frèch ou frèch!
You look delightfully cool, clean and attractive. The
E. word ‘fresh’ in the meaning of ‘impudent’ is
‘frekan’ in Creole.
frechè a n 1. Freshness*; coolness, fresh air.
L’al mete yon ti frechè She went to spruce up.
2. Rheumatism. 3. Neologism for ‘whore’.
fredi a, fwedi a n Coolness, chill, cool, cold.
Ala fredi! What cold weather! M’pè fredi I’m
sensitive to cold.
fredite a n 1. Cold weather. 2. Sickness supposedly
caused by cold weather.
fregat la n Frigate* (bird).
frekan attrib ‘Fresh’, forward, inpertinent, insolent,
impudent, pretentious. Fè frekan ak To get
fresh with. Li frekan kon chen He is too familiar,
too fresh. He’s got too much nerve.
frekansite a n Impertinence. Ala frekansite!
What impertinence!
frekantasyon an n Relationship (persons with
whom one socializes).
frekante vt To socialize with, to frequent*, to
associate with. M’pa frekante yo I don’t associate
with them.
fremi vi To shiver, to shudder.
fren an n Brake (on a vehicle). Fren a men
Emergency or hand brake. Mete fren To put a stop
to.
frengan attrib Active, energetic, vivacious, spirited.
frenn nan 1
n Friend*.
frenn nan, fwenn nan 2
n Dagger, lance, a sharp
stick, harpoon, cutlass; any pointed object that
can be used as a dagger.
frennen, fwennen vt 1. To put on the brake(s).
2. To strike, to stab with a ‘frenn’.
fresi a n Liver (animal’s).
fresko a, frisko a n Snowball (grated ice on
which one pours a fruit syrup).
frèt, fwèt attrib 1. Cold, chilly. 2. Indifferent,
quiet, cold. Yo resevwa’m frèt They gave me a
cold reception. Yon bo frèt A kiss without too much
enthusiasm. Mouri frèt To die suddenly. Frèt kon
nen chen Very cold. Frèt anpil Freezing.
frete vt To lease, to charter, to hire (boat,
plane). M’frete yon vwati pou m’al Jakmèl I hired
a car to go to Jacmel.
freyè a n Fright, fear, dread, terror.
frèz la n Strawberry.
frezè V frize
fri 1
vt To fry*. Fri sèk Fried and dried (fish,
meat, etc.). Fri nan sòs Fried in a sauce (gravy).
Mon chè, ou fri My friend, you are done for, your
goose is cooked.
G 72
fri a 2
V frui a
fridòdòy la n 1. Snack food usually sold on the
street. Al lan fridòdòy To go buy and eat any old
food on the street.
frijidè a n Refrigerator, frigidaire*. (fig) Frigid
woman.
frikase vt To fricassee*, to sauté.
friksyon an n Rubbing, friction*.
friksyonnen vt To massage, to give a rubdown,
to rub with oil, lotion. Ba li grenn pou lafyèv la
epi friksyonnen’l Give him some pills for his fever
and massage him.
frison an n Shiver(s). Lafyèv frison Chills accompanied
with fever.
frisonnen vi To shiver.
fritay la n Fried* food, fish-fry.
frite vi To roam about in search of food.
friti a n Fried food, particularly fried fish, fried
bananas, fried* pork. Machann friti Saleswoman
of fried food.
friyan (pou) attrib Crazy (about), very fond (of).
frize 1
vt To curl (hair).
frize a, freze a 2
n Barn-owl, screech-owl.
fromaj la, fronmay la n Cheese.
fromajye a n Indian mulberry, painkiller. This
tree is also called ‘doulè’ in Creole. Morinda
citrifolia L.
fron an n Forehead, brow. Ou gen fron You
have the nerve, you have the audacity (to).
fronmi V foumi
fronte 1
attrib Audacious, insolent, shameless,
impertinent, impudent, smart(y).
fronte a 2
n Sexual intercourse. L’ap fè you fronte
He is having intercourse; he is getting a piece.
frote vt To rub, to scrub. V foubi. Pantalon an
merite frote nan dlo The trousers (pants) should be
scrubbed in water.
frotman an n 1. Rubbing. 2. Contact(s) (the
habit of frequenting people).
frui a, fri a, fwi a n Fruit*.
fuit la, fwit la n Small leak. Chanm bisiklèt la gen
fuit The bicycle innertube has a leak.
fuiya a n Runaway.
fwa a, fwa di 1
n Liver. Fwa mou Lights, lungs
(of slaughtered animals).
fwa a, lafwa 2
n Faith, trust. Li gen movèz fwa
He is not bona fide, he is acting in bad faith.
fwa a, lafwa 3
n Time, turn. Yon fwa Once. De
fwa Twice. Gen de fwa There are times... Fwa sa
a This time. A la fwa At a time, simultanously.
Te gen yon fwa Once upon a time. Yon lòt fwa
Another time, on another occasion. Yon fwa ankò
Once more, one more time. Anpil fwa Over and
over. Lafwa pase, lafwa dènyè Last time. Yon fwa
pou tout Once and for all.
fware vt To strip (screws).
fwase vt To offend, to be offended. V estomake.
Sa te fwase’m That hurt me.
fwaye a, fouye a n 1. Hearth. Also: fwaye dife,
(usu) made with three stones. 2. Household.
fwego a n Virility, vigor, potency, heat (sexual).
Sp.
fwenk interj Damn it! Interjection expressing
discontent and disgust. DYESIFÒ: Remèt mwen
kòb la, fwenk! Damn it, give me back the money!
fwenn V frenn
fwennen V frennen
fwèt la, frèt la n Lash, whip, horse whip. V Rigwaz,
kash, matinèt. Bat ak fwèt To flog. Voye fwèt sou
tout moun To thrash right and left.
fwi V frui
fwit V fuit
fyasko a n Fiasco*. International Italianism.
fye vt To trust (in), to confide* (in), to have
confidence (in).
fyè, fyèr attrib Proud.
fyèl la n Gall; gallbladder; stamina, courage,
resistance, endurance. Gen fyèl To be courageous;
i.e. to be able to take it. Rann fyèl To break one’s
back doing something. M’ap pete fyèl li I’m going
to split him wide open. M’nan yon travay, se pete
fyèl I’m doing very hard work. Anmè kon fyèl
Bitter as gall.
fyète a n Pride.
fyèv V lafyèv
fyon Fè fyon To show off, to be boasting.
fyouz la n Fuse* (electrical).
G
ga a n (Railway) Station; (bus) Terminal.
gabadin nan n Gabardine*.
gabèl la n Advantage, head start, edge, concession.
An’n kòmanse kous la; pran devan; m’ba ou gabèl
Let’s begin the race; start now; I’ll give you a head
start.
gabotaj la, gabotay la n Operation of national
ships along the coasts of Haiti.
73 G
gachèt la n Trigger.
gad 1
vt Elliptical form of ‘gade’. Gad sa l’ap fè
Watch what he’s doing. Pa gad sou figi moun
(You) don’t judge by one’s facial expression.
gad la 2
n 1. Guard*, orderly, policeman, soldier.
2. Amulet. V gadyen, gadò. M’pa konn kote
m’gad I don’t know where I stand (guard); I don’t
know what my situation is.
gadavou At attention. Mete ou o gadavou Stand
at attention.
gadè V gadò
gade, gad 1
vt 1. To look (at), to behold, to
glance (at). 2. To watch, to watch over, to attend
to. 3. To keep; to store up. 4. To raise (animals).
Examples and expressions: Gade atè To look
down. Gade dèyè To look back. Gade deyò To look
outside. Gade anlè To look up. Gade! Gade non!
Pay attention! Listen! Be careful! Be on your guard!
PRESSOIR-44: Chat koumanse ap gade yo The cat
started to look at them. Gade lè’l non! Just look at
him! PRESSOIR-42: Li deside pou’l gade yo He
decided to keep them. N’ap gade pou n’wè kisa ane
sa a ap pote pou nou We’ll wait and see what this
year has in store for us. Pa gade sou li Don’t model
your behavior after him. Vire gade To look back. Li
fè yon ti gade He took a peek.
gade, regade 2
vt To concern. Sa pa gade’m
(or) Sa pa regade’m It’s none of my business. It
doesn’t concern me.
gadinay la, gadinaj la n Raising, taking care of
(animals).
gadjit V gagit
gadkò a n 1. Body guard. 2. Protective charm
worn for protection against evil spirits.
gadkòt la n Coast guard*.
gadmanje a n Cupboard, larder, pantry, meat-safe.
PRESSOIR-45: Yo kouri bò gadmanje a They run
toward the cupboard.
gadmantèg la, gadmantèk la n Servant (pej),
slut. Scullion (man servant).
gadò a, gadè a n 1. Herdsman, animal caretaker,
keeper. 2. Babysitter. Gadò mouton Shepherd.
M’pa pitimi san gadò Don’t think I don’t have
anybody to take care of me.
gadròb la n Wardrobe*.
gadyatè a, gadyatò a n Keeper. Gadyatè kochon
Swine-herder.
gadyen an n Watchman, guardian*, caretaker,
guard*, keeper, shepherd. V gadò.
gadyendbi a Goalie, goalkeeper. Haitians also
use the word ‘goal keeper’ (gòlkipè).
gaga attrib 1. Senile; old fool. 2. Dumbstruck,
woozy. M’rete gaga devan fi a I was thrilled
(speechless) in the presence of that woman.
gagann nan n Throat, neck, gullet. Sp. garganta.
Bay gagann To give a blow on s.o.’s Adam’s apple.
gagannen vt To grab s.o. by the throat; to hit
s.o. on the throat.
gagari 1
vi To gargle*.
gagari a 2
n Gargling*.
gagè a, gadjè a, gagyè a n Cock-pit (place where
cockfights take place), cockfighting ring. Vole
gagè To leave, to slip away unceremoniously, sometimes
furtively.
gagit, gadjit Klou gagit A small nail used for
example to nail sole to shoe.
gagòt la, gagotay la n Fè gagòt; fè gagotay To
spill water, food or anything in a slovenly fashion.
Timoun, ase fè gagòt sou tab la Children, stop
spilling everything on the table.
gagotay V gagòt
gagote vi To spill water, food or anything in a
slovenly fashion.
gaj la n Contractual obligation with the Vodou
priest. Cf. angajman.
gal V lagal
galan attrib Courtly, courteous, ladies’ man. Cf
E. gallant*.
galata a n 1. Attic. V galta. 2. A small bush
type of agave.
galè a n Wood plane (tool).
galeri V galri
galèt la n 1. Pebble(s), stone(s) found in a
riverbed. 2. (Dry) Riverbed with pebbles.
galipòt la, gayipòt, galpòt n 1. Mythical animal
like a werewolf. 2. A person who moves fast
and can be at two places at the same time.
3. Witch, sorcerer.
galize V egalize
galon an n 1. Gallon*. 2. Stripe (milit).
galonnen, garyonnen vi 1. To gad about, to
revel, to prance around. 2. To decorate (with
ribbons, bands, medals) or to promote (mil-
itary).
galope vi To gallop*, to run fast.
galpòt V galipòt
galri a, galeri a n Porch, gallery*, veranda.
galta a, galata a, gay(i)ta (North) n Attic, loft;
store-house, granary.
gam Fè gam (or) Chante gam To boast.
gan an 1
n Glove. M’pa nan gan blan avèk li I’m
not going to treat him with kid gloves; I’m not going
to give him any special treatment.
gan 2
V gen
G 74
gangan an, ganga a n Vodou priest.
gangans la n Elegance*. Ala yon gangans! How
elegant!
gangozye V grangozye
gangrenn nan, kangrenn nan n Gangrene*.
gangrennen, kangrennen vi To gangrene*, to
become gangrenous.
gani vt To garnish*.
ganiti a n Ornaments, trimming(s) used by
seamstresses, garnishings*.
ganmèl la, gamèl la n Wooden basin, washtub,
washbowl; trough, platter, wooden pan.
gany lan, gen an, djen an n Winnings from a bet
or competition, prize; profit, earning, gain*, rakeoff.
Bay gany; bay legen To concede, to accept
defeat. FRANKETIENNE/B-55: Enben, nou bwè
li!...Nou ba ou gany We give up, we concede, you
win. V legen.
ganyen V gen
garaj la, garay la n Garage*.
garanti 1
vt To ensure, to guaranty*.
garanti a 2
n Guarantee*, warranty*; collateral.
Machann nan ban’m yon garanti twa mwa sou mont
la The merchant gave me a three month guarantee
on the watch.
garo a n Tourniquet (to stop bleeding).
garyon an n Kaka garyon Tobacco scraps; trifle,
unimportant thing.
garyonnen V galonnen
gason an n 1. Male. 2. Man. Tigason Boy.
3. Waiter. 4. (attrib) Virile, manly. Gason kanson
Courageous, brave man. Se yon bon gason He is
good-hearted. Gason lakou Servant, domestic (male).
Li pa gason He is impotent. Mete gason sou ou
Act as a man, be brave, hold tight. Gason makomè
An effeminate man.
gaspiyay la, gaspiyaj la n Waste, squandering.
gaspiye vt To waste, to go to waste, to dissipate,
to squander.
gaspiyè a n Spendthrift.
gate vt 1. To ruin, to wreck. Gate pati To ruin a
party. (Also: He who does it is called “gate pati”.)
Non gate Nickname. 2. To spoil; to corrupt.
3. To spoil (child); to pamper (the loved one).
vi To rot, to go to waste*.
gato a n Cake. Gato myèl Honeycomb.
gawa M’nan gawa ou (or) M’a manje gawa ou I
am going to keep after you; I am going to get you.
gay la n Game cock. (Sp. gallo).
gaya attrib Healthy (cured). M’malad toujou; lò
m’a gaya, m’a vin wè ou I’m still sick. When I’m
well, I’ll come and see you.
gayak la n 1. Type of hard wood. Gayacum
officinale, Lignum vitae. L. Jamaica: gayacumwood.
2. Cudgel (stick) made from this wood.
gaye 1
attrib Dumbstruck in amasement, bewildered,
mixed up.
gaye 2
vt To disperse, to scatter, to spread (out).
Liv yo te byen ranje, ou gaye yo The books were in
proper order and you have mixed them up. Nouvèl
la gaye The news has spread. Plon gaye Buck-shot.
gaz la 1
n Gas*, stomach gas. Se yon gaz ki
kenbe’m It’s gas in my stomach which is causing
me all kinds of trouble. Rann gaz To burp, to belch.
gaz 2
la n Gauze* Also: twal gaz.
gaz la 3
V gazolin
gazèl la n Heifer, cow. Also: gazèl bèf.
gazolin nan, gazòlin nan, gaz la n Gasoline,
petrol. Fè gaz (or) Fè gazolin To put gasoline
in a motor vehicle, to fill up. Oto a pran pàn gaz
The car is out of gas.
gazon an n Lawn, sod.
gazòy la n Diesel fuel.
ge attrib Merry, gay*; tipsy.
gede, legede n Vodou spirit. Supernatural spirit
associated with the dead.
gen, gan, genyen, ganyen 1
impers v There is,
there are (to exist). Gen de lè... There are times
when... Gen lè... It looks like... It seems... Gen
moun There is company; there are people. Gen de
moun ki... There are some people who... Mete pase
genyen To exaggerate (to put more than there is).
MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-9: Gan yon gro fotèy pay
devan yon ti kay There is a big straw armchair in
front of a small house.
gen, gan, genyen, ganyen 2
vt 1. To have; to
earn, to gain*, to possess, to win*. (‘Gen’ and
‘gan’ cannot be placed at the end of a sentence;
in this case the long forms ‘genyen’ and ‘ganyen’
are used). M’gen youn I have one. Sa li genyen?
What is the matter with him? Gen pou To have to,
must. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-1: M’gan 2 ou 3
bagay pou’m di I have two or three things to say.
M’pa gen anyen sou machandiz la I don’t make any
profit on that merchandise.
gengenn Fè gengenn To strut, to parade, to walk
gracefully.
genn nan, djenn nan n Girdle, corset; sheath,
scabbard, case. V fouro.
genyen V gen
gèp la, djèp la n Wasp*, yellow jacket.
75 G
geri vt To cure, to heal; to get well. DEJEAN-7:
Li geri domestik yon ofisye He cured the servant of
an officer. Ki pa ka geri Incurable. Geri bosko
V bosko.
gerit la n Sentry box.
gerizon an n Cure, recovery.
gèt 1
interj What! Wow! (Exclamation denoting
surprise).
gèt la 2
n Clitoris. V krèk, langèt.
gèt la, djèt la 3
n Legging(s), gaiter*. Gèt jandam
Policeman’s leggings. Debouye (demele) gèt ou Find
a way out. Get a move on.
gete 1
vt To watch, to look at, to view.
gete a 2
n Joy, gayety*.
gi a n Mistletoe (bot).
giche a, gichè a n Cashier’s window.
gid la n Guide*.
gidon an n 1. Handle-bar of a bicycle. 2. Hoop
stick. Lage de gidon dèyè yon moun To go after
s.o., to pursue s.o. relentlessly for a specific purpose.
gigit la n Penis (child’s language). Also: ti gigit.
gildiv la n Distillery, still to process sugar cane
into ‘kleren’, ‘tafya’, rum, alcohol, etc.
gilmòv la, gimòv la n Marshmallow plant.
Ginen, Gine n Guinea*; Africa. Depi nan Ginen
Since the time we were in Africa; traditionally; from
olden times. Farin Ginen Flour with which the
‘vèvè’ is drawn (outlined) on the ground.
gita a n Guitar*.
giyon an n Jinx, bad luck.
giyonnen vt To nag, to pester, to tease, to goad;
to bring bad luck to. Kite’m trankil; ase giyonnen’m
Leave me alone; stop picking on me; stop bothering
me.
giyonnman an n Goading.
glann nan n Gland*.
glas la n 1. Pane, glass*. 2. Mirror. 3. Ice, icicle
V glason. 4. Stone in a riverbed. Glas la fè
men’m angoudi The ice made my hand numb.
glase vt 1. To chill. 2. To freeze. Frozen, icy,
cold, iced. Dlo glase Iced water.
glasi a n Threshing floor; a floor with a hardened
surface. Glasi kafe Cement floor for drying coffee.
glason an n Ice cube. V glas.
glasyè a n Ice-box, freezer.
glayèl la n Gladiolus*.
glè a n Phlegm. V flenm.
glisad la n Slip (slipping).
glise 1
vi To slide, to slip, to glide.
glise 2
attrib Slippery.
glisyè a n Track (of a sliding door).
glo V dlo
glòb la n 1. Globe*. 2. Blister, callus. Boule a
ban’m glòb nan men The burn on my hand gave me
a blister.
glòs la n Small bottle used as a measure for
liquids (cooking oil, etc.).
glòtglòtglòt adv In one gulp, fast in one swallow.
Li vale’l glòtglòtglòt He gobbled it up fast.
glwa a, laglwa n Glory*.
gòb la n A piece, a large portion.
gobe vt To guzzle, to eat greedily. V bafre, tifle.
goblè a, goblèt la n Goblet*. A small cup (usu)
smaller than a ‘gode’, without handle. V gode.
gòch attrib 1. Left. 2. Clumsy, awkward. Vire a
gòch To turn left.
goche attrib Left-handed. Li goche; li pa ka ekri
ak men dwat He is left-handed; he can’t write with
his right hand.
gode a n Cup, mug. V goble. A gro gode In
abundance, abundantly.
gòdèm interj God damn*. Often: Gòdèm sala-mabit
God damn! Son of a bitch*.
gòdèt la n Goblet*, cup. Afè ou nan ti gòdèt You
are in straits; your situation is not clear; you’re in
trouble. M’ap ba ou sa nan bon ti gòdèt I am going
to tell you the story as it is.
godrin V goudrin
godron V goudron
gògmagòg n A grand mixup, promiscuity, disorder.
M’pa janm nan gògmagòg ak moun I don’t
get too familiar with people; I don’t mix in with
people.
gòj la n Throat. Mal gòj Sore throat, laryngitis.
Gòj li sere He can’t talk; he’s so upset. V pòtgòj.
gòje a n Sip, gulp, swallow, draft.
gòjèt la n Throat.
gòl la 1
n Goal* (sports). Ekip ki bay plis gòl la
genyen The team which scores the most goals wins.
gòl la 2
n Long, thin pole, stick.
golinen vt To intertwine with long sticks (gòl)
while constructing a house.
gòlkipè a n Goal keeper*.
golyon an n A tall and thin person.
gòm nan, gonm nan 1
n Glue, gum*, resin paste.
V lakòl. Pran lan gonm To trap, to dupe; to get
trapped.
G 76
gòm nan, gonm nan 2
n Eraser (rubber).
gòmen V gonmen
gomye a, gonmye a n West Indian gum-tree*,
acacia-gum. Gonmye: name of a place in the
Grand’Anse province. Sa m’wè pou ou, Antwàn
nan Gonmye pa wè’l If you only knew what’s hanging
over your nose; the sword of Damocles is hanging
over your head. (Literally: Not even Anthony, the
‘voyeur’ who lives in the Gonmye region, can
foresee what I foresee for you).
gon 1
Contraction for gen yon There is a. Cf. fon
(fè yon), son (se yon).
gon an 2
n Hinge.
gonbo a n Okra, Gumbo*. Hibiscus esculentus
L.
gonde V gronde
gondoye vi 1. To scull (to propell a boat with a
stern-oar). 2. To hobble along, to walk with
difficulty.
gonfle vt 1. To cause indigestion. DYESIFÒ:
Roma a gonfle’l The lobster gave him indigestion.
2. To inflate, to blow up (balloon, tire, etc.).
3. To swell, to puff up, to distend. Ma-chwa’l
gonfle His jaw is swollen.
gonfleman an n Indigestion, (literally) swelling.
gongòlò a, kongòlò, ngongòlò, gangòlò n Congolo*
(a species of centipede that rolls itself up
when touched).
gonm V gòm
gonmen, gòmen vt 1. To put glue on. Rebò
anvlòp la deja gonmen The edges of the envelope
(already) have glue on them. 2. To be sticky, gluey,
viscous.
gonmye V gomye
gou 1
attrib Tasty, delicious, yummy, attractive.
Manje a gou The food is delicious.
gou a 2
n Taste, flavor. Manje a gen gou pike;
manje a pike The food is hot (because of the hot
pepper in it). Nan gou’l As he pleases; to his
liking.
goud la n Unit of the Haitian monetary system
originally equivalent to 20 U.S. cents.
gouden an n 1/4 Goud* or 25 Haitian cents.
(Originally 5 U.S. cents).
goudi a n Stern oar.
goudiye vi To scull (to row with the stern-oar).
goudrin nan, godrin nan n Beverage made from
pineapple rinds soaked in water for several days.
goudron an, godron an n Tar, pine tar, asphalt.
goudronnen vt To tar, to pave, to asphalt.
gouf la n 1. Abyss, bottomless hole. 2. Yon gouf
A lot of. Yon gouf moun A lot of people, a crowd.
gougoun attrib Greedy, gluttonous.
gouman attrib Gluttonous, heavy eater. V afre,
aloufa, gwenf.
goumen vi To fight, to struggle, to brawl, to
wrestle.
goumèt la n 1. (Identification) Bracelet. 2. Bit,
curb. Mete goumèt pou yon chwal To curb a horse.
gounouy V grenouy
gous la n Pod, shell, husk.
gousan an n Edible caterpillar. Sp. gusano.
gout la n Drop. Tigout, ti gout Some, a bit of (a
liquid)
goute 1
vt To taste, to try.
goute 2
V degoute
goutyè a n 1. Hole in roof causing rain water to
drip from a ceiling. 2. Gutter* (eaves trough).
gouvènay la n Rudder.
gouvènè a n Governor*.
gouvènen, gouvène vt To govern*, to rule over.
gouvènman an n Government*.
gouyad la, yayad la n Sensuous wiggling, waddling,
gait, contortion.
gouyav V gwayav
gouye vi To wriggle, particularly in love-making;
to crawl. Gouye kò ou Get a move on.
govi a n Vodou term: an earthen vessel in
which the ‘loas’ and spirits are kept in the ‘hounfò’.
Also called ‘pòt tèt’ (COURLANDER).
goyin nan, legoyin nan n Handsaw. Nou bezwen
goyin pou fè travay la We need a handsaw to do the
work.
gozye a n Gullet, throat. V grangozye.
gra attrib Fat, corpulent. Ou trò gra You are too
fat. (adv): Ri gra To laugh uninhibitedly, wholeheartedly.
Boule gra Keep on going! Keep on doing
what you are doing!
graba a n Shabby straw mat.
grad la n Rank, grade*. Li monte grad He was
promoted. Pran grad To advance, to step up, to get
a promotion.
grade vt To promote, to give a promotion (milit).
gradoub la n (edible) Intestines (rough).
grafiyen V grafouyen
grafouyen, grafiyen vt To scratch leaving a slight
scar. To claw. Cf. grifonnen.
gragra a n Black crow.
77 G
graj la n 1. Grater, rasp. 2. Sheet-metal scraping
device used in secular music (COURLANDER).
3. (attrib) Rough, unpolished.
graje vt 1. To grate, to grind. 2. To squirm, to
fidget, to be uneasy. Li tap graje sou chèz dantis
la He was squirming in the dentist’s chair.
grajè a n Insolent, impertinent, ‘fresh’ person.
gram nan n 1. Gram*. 2. Yon gram A little bit.
gramè a n Grammar*.
gran attrib 1. Great, large, wide, important. 2. Old,
grown, grown up. Fè gran banda To act important.
Vin pi gran To expand, to grow. Gran anpil Vast.
Gran frè Older brother. Gran chire Braggart,
braggadocio, swaggerer. Fè gran chire To show off.
Gran dizè Braggart, big talker. Gran grann Great
grand mother (V bizayèl, tatawèl). Gran nèg
Important person. Gran chemen Highway. Gran
breng Big fellow. Yon gran breng konsa, l’ap aji
kon timoun A big fellow like that, he is acting like
a child. Gran maten At dawn.
grand attrib Rare except in certain phrases. De
grand tay Tall.
grandan an n Big talker, show-off V farandolè.
grandè a n 1. Size. 2. Grandeur*, pretentiousness.
Li gen foli grandè He has illusions of grandeur.
grandèt (usu) Grandèt tifi An adolescent girl.
grandi vi To grow, to increase. Pitit tap grandi
The child was growing up. Pa grandi sou mwen!
Don’t act big with me!
grandon an n Big landowner.
grandou a n Large kite (for flying). V kap,
sèvolan.
granfrè a, gran frè a n Elder brother.
grangou a n Hunger, starvation. Dòmi grangou
(To go) to sleep on an empty stomach. M’pa grangou
I’m not hungry.
grangozye a, gangozye, gangouzye n 1. Pelican.
2. (fig) Glutton.
grangrann nan, gran grann nan n Great grand-
mother.
grangranpapa a, gran gran papa a n Great grand-
father.
granmè a n Grandmother*. (The usual word is
‘grann’).
granmesi, granmèsi, gremesi prep Thanks to.
Pou granmesi In vain, for nothing.
granmèt la, gran mèt la n God, Great Master.
V Bondye. M’sou kont Granmèt la I’m unter the
protection of the Lord; I’m in His hands.
granmmaten, granm maten, granm ti maten adv
Very early in the morning.
granmoun nan n 1. Adult, grown up. Timoun pa
betize (jwe) ak granmoun Children should not joke
with adults. Se granmoun ki non’l He is a person
of experience. 2. Old person, elderly. 3. Adult
responsible for a child. Al chèche granmoun ou
Go fetch the person responsible for you. 4. (fig)
Old.
grann nan n Grandmother*, granny*. Grann bò
papa Paternal grandmother. Grann bò manman
Maternal grandmother.
grannlijèn, grandlijèn, agrandlijèn adv Abundantly,
on a large (grand) scale.
granpanpan attrib Pedant, show-off.
granpapa a, gran papa a n Grandfather.
granpè a, gran pè a n Grandfather (rare).
gransè a, gran sè a n Elder sister.
grantchalè, granchalè a n Gonorrhea.
V ekoulman, chòlpiskòde.
grap la n 1. Bunch, cluster. Pran ak grap To
rebuff, to give a bad reception, to lash out at someone,
to let someone have it. 2. Yon grap: A lot of. Yon
grap zwazo A lot of birds.
grapday la n Bit, small piece; small salary. M’ap
chèche yon ti grapday nan lari a I’m looking for a
little something out there on the street; I am broke.
grape vt To grab, to seize.
grapen an n Hook. Poze grapen sou To take hold
of, to grab.
grapiyay la, grapyay la n System of farming
whereby a peasant plants many types of crops
instead of limiting himself to one export crop.
grapiyen vt To gather (from a garden). V grapiyay.
2. To grab. Chat la grapiyen de sourit The
cat caught two mice.
grapji Something ugly.
gras la n Grace*; forgiveness, pardon. Mande
gras To ask for mercy. Gras a Thanks to, because
of. An gras Please. M’priye ou an gras I beg of
you. Gras lamizerikòd Lord have mercy.
grasèt attrib (Pleasingly) Plump.
grasye vt To pardon (a prisoner).
grat la n Scraper.
grate vt 1. To scratch, to scrape, to grate*. 2. To
itch. 3. To flee, to scram(ble). Men gòch mwen
ap grate’m My left hand is itching. M’di ou
peye’m, w’ap vin grate tèt ban mwen I am telling
you to pay me and you are telling me you don’t have
the money.
gratè a n Impertinent, insolent, young punk;
gate crasher.
gratèl la, lagratèl n 1. Itch, a skin disease characterized
by itching. 2. Poison ivy. 3. Jelly fish.
G 78
graten V graton
gratis attrib Free (of charge), gratis*.
graton an, graten an n The crust at the botton of
a pot of rice, ground of corn, etc. Tèt graton
Sparse kinky hair.
gratwa a n Scraper.
grav attrib Grave*, serious, critical.
grave vt To engrave*; to scratch (leaving a mark).
Li grave vèrèt He has pockmarks.
gravman adv Gravely*, seriously.
gravwa a n Gravel*.
gravye a n Gravel*.
grebete V krebete
gredè a n Grader* (for road building).
grèf la n Graft*, grafting*. Mete grèf (or) grefe
To graft.
grefe vt To graft*.
grèg la, grèp la, grèk la n Coffee-filter, coffee
sieve made of cloth.
grèk la 1
n Greek* (people, language).
grèk 2
V grèg
grena, grenna attrib Garnet* (color).
grenad la, grennad la n 1. Grenade*. 2. Pome-
granate*.
grenadin nan, grennadin nan n Grenadine* (a
tropical fruit). Passiflora quadrangularis L.
grenadya a n A Haitian fruit from which a
delicious juice is extracted.
grengole V degrengole
grenn 1
attrib 1. Kinky (hair). 2. Kè’m grenn I
am sad, melancholic, apprehensive.
grenn nan 2
n 1. Grain*, berry, seed. 2. Testicle.
3. Pill. 4. Ti grenn Girl, chick. Also: A speck.
Examples and expressions: Yon ti grenn sab A
grain of sand. Yon grenn Just one; a single one.
Pa yon grenn Not a single one. Yon grenn senk A
person without protection, an isolated person, a person
by himself. Li gen grenn He has guts. Grenn vant
Womb. Grenn chaple Rosary bead. Grenn kolye
Pearl (pearl necklace). Li renmen’m tankou de
grenn je nan tèt li She loves me as her own two eyes.
Grenn maldyòk A seed on a string placed around
the neck of a child falling on the stomach to ward off
evil. Li gen grenn pèlenpenpen He is restless.
grenn promennen an n Vagrant. A person constantly
on the move.
grennen, grènen vt To shell (mayi corn); to say
(chaple the rosary); to count out one by one
(grain* by grain); to produce a great amount of.
Examples and expressions: Grennen pitit To
have (produce) many children one after the other.
Also: Simen pitit. Grennen lajan To overwhelm
with money. Lese grennen Let it be, let it alone. Yo
grennen bal sou li They riddled him with bullets.
grenouy la, gounouy la n Frog. V krapo.
grenpe vt To climb (up, on), to scale, to ascend.
grenye a n Attic, loft.
grèp V grèg
grès la n Grease*, fat, gravy. Grès kochon Lard.
Ou ap pran yon bèl grès You’re getting fat. Ki plen
grès (or) Ki plen tach grès Greasy.
grese vt To fatten; to grease*, to lubricate, to oil.
Grese sere yon oto To tighten and lubricate a car.
Grese pat yon moun To grease one’s palm.
greton an n Fried pork (word used in Jérémie
for the more common ‘griyo’. Cf. Fr créton.
grèv la n Strike. Fè grèv To go on strike.
gri 1
attrib 1. Gray*. 2. Inebriated, drunk. Gri
kon po silabè Drunk as a kite. N.B. The best
known Haitian primer (silabè) has a gray cover.
gri a, griy la 2
n Grill* (for cooking).
gridap attrib Used mostly in the expression tèt
gridap kinky, short, nappy hair. Lanp tèt gridap
refers to a kerosene lamp (tin lantern) with a
handle.
grif la 1
n Claw.
grif la 2
n A crossing between a mulatto and a
person with dark skin.
grifonn nan n Woman of mixed blood. V grif.
grifonnen, grifònen vt To claw, to scratch with
the finger nails or the claws. V grafouyen.
grigri a 1
n Charm (Vodou term).
grigri a 2
n Small bird of prey that eats mice,
small birds, etc. Sparrow hawk. Falco sparve-rius.
See Roger Nelson’s Zwazo Ayiti yo, page 52.
grij la n Fold, furrow, wrinkle.
griji vt To pleat, to sew very close, to wrinkle, to
gather (material).
grimas la n Grin, wry face; monkey tricks, grimace*.
Fè grimas To make faces.
grimèl la n Applied to females. V grimo. Variant:
grimèl chode.
grimo a n Person with light skin and kinky hair.
V grimèl. Variant: grimo chode.
grinback la, grimbak la n Money, greenback*.
grip la n Cold, grip* (sickness), influenza.
gripe attrib To have a cold. V anrimen. Ou
gripe? You have a cold?
griyad la n Grilled* meat.
griye vt To broil; to roast, to toast, to grill*.
79 H
griyen vi To laugh. Griyen dan To grin*, to smile
wryly, to grimace, to smile ironically; to gnash one’s
teeth menacingly.
griyo a 1
n Small pieces of minced roast pork
(highly spiced), fried pork chunks. MORISSEAULEROY/D-10:
Tout moun ap fè griyo Everybody is
making ‘griyo’.
griyo a 2
n Story-teller. Also: mèt kont.
grizon an n Graybeard. Type of marble (toy).
Ròch grizon Type of stone with many holes on its
surface.
grizonnen vi To turn gray (hair). To have gray
hair (person).
gro, gwo attrib Big, large, enormous, considerable,
extensive. Gro ble Denim (cheap blue material
used to make clothes). Yon gro devenn A big
misfortune. Groje Greedy (big-eyed). Gro lo a
The first prize in a lottery. Gro anpil Enormous.
Gro madanm Fat lady. Gro mo Abusive term, a
curse word. Gro lajan Large sum of money. Gro
nèg Big shot. Gro bon sans Common sens. Gro
pous Thumb. Manje gro pous To regret. Gro vwa
Deep, powerful voice. Gro vant Pregnant, big
bellied. Gro zotobre, gro popo, gro zouzoun, gro
bwa, gro moun Important person, big shot. An gro
Wholesale. Gro midi At high noon. Gro lajounen
In broad daylight. Gro lannuit In the dead of
night. Gro po Fabric of superior quality; one’s best
suit.
grobren an n Twilight.
gròg la n Grog*, drink, white rhum, or other
alcoholic drink.
grògi attrib Groggy*, woozy.
grògmann nan n Drunkard, heavy drinker.
grogòj la n Trachea.
groje attrib Greedy, too demanding, voracious,
expecting too much.
gronde, gonde, gwonde vi To roar, to grumble,
to growl, to rumble. Motè a gronde The motor is
humming. Loray ap gronde The thunder is rumbling.
gronyen vi To grumble.
gròs 1
vt To make pregnant; to knock up (pop).
gròs, gòs 2
attrib Pregnant, enceinte. (For animals,
the usual word is ‘plenn’). Fi a gròs senk mwa
The woman is five months gone (pregnant).
grosè a n Size; bigness.
grosès la n Pregnancy.
grosi vi To get fat, to enlarge, to swell.
grosomodo, groso modo Roughly; carelessly.
grosoulye, gro soulye attrib Crude, unrefined
person.
grosye attrib Rough, nasty, gruff, gross* (person).
gròt la, lagròt, gwòt la n Cave, grotto*.
group la n Group*, cluster, troup.
grovant attrib Pregnant. Fi ki grovant pa dwe
monte chwal A pregnant woman should not ride on
horseback.
grozo attrib Big, brawn.
grozòtèy, gro zòtèy attrib Rough, crude, ‘country
hicks’.
grozotobre, gro zotobre n Big shot.
gwagwa a n Jalopy. From Sp.
gwangul la n Raintree. Pithecellobium saman
(Jacq.) Benth.
gwann nan n 1. Needle. 2. Type of drum. 3. Pole,
for example palm tree, upon which bunches of
ears of corn are hung tied in strings. 4. Tree
the fiber of which is used to make hats, ropes,
etc.
gwap attrib Brutal, brute.
gwayabèl la n Type of jacket worn in tropical
countries (Cuba, Haiti).
gwayav la, gouyav la n Guava*. Psidium guajava
L.
gwayil attrib Peasant (figuratively), hick, uncouth,
vulgar.
gwenf attrib Gluttonous, heavy eater. Cf. afre,
aloufa.
gyòl V dyòl
gyòlè V dyòlè
H
had la, rad la n Clothes. (In some areas of
Haiti, particularly the South, initial h- often alternates
with r.)
hale V rale
hany Interj Hey! (Exclamation denoting a slight
anger).
hèk V rèk
hèl V rèl
hey interj Hey! You there!
hinghang, yingyang n (onom) Quarrel, fight,
argument, dissension, discord. Tout lajounen, se
yon hinghang kay vwazen yo The neighbors are
quarreling all day long and showing their teeth to
each other.
hololi V roroli
hont V ront
I 80
hounfò V ounfò
houngan V oungan
hounsi V ounsi
hountò n Benevolent ghost.
I
i pers pron He, she, it (used in the North). I
manje He ate.
ibis la n Ibis*.
ibo n An African ethnic group (Igbo). A language.
A folk dance rythm.
idantite a n Katdidantite Identification card.
ide 1
V ede
ide 2
V lide
idòl la, zidòl la n Idol*.
idyo attrib Idiot*.
idyòt attrib Stupid (woman).
igwàn nan, igwann nan n Iguana*.
ijan attrib Urgent*.
ijyèn nan, lijyèn n Hygiene*, cleanliness, Hygien-
ics*.
ijyenik attrib Papye ijyenik Toilet paper.
il la, lil, zile, zil n Isle*, islet*, island*. V zilo.
ilanilan an n Ylang-Ylang. Cananga odorata (Lam.)
Hook. F. and Thoms.
ilfo V fò
ilizyon an n Illusion*.
ilsè a n Ulcer*.
imaj la, imay la n Portrait, image*.
imajinasyon an n Imagination*.
imajinen, imajine vt To imagine*.
imè a n 1. Humor*. 2. Inflamation, pus.
imedyatman adv Immediately*.
imid attrib Humid*, damp.
imidite a n Humidity*.
imigrasyon an n Immigraton*. Biro imigrasyon
Bureau of immigration.
imilyasyon an n Humiliation*.
imilye vt To humiliate*, to put down.
imite vt To imitate*; to ape.
imoral attrib Immoral*.
imoralite a, limoralite n Immorality*.
ini vt To unite*. United*. Rann ini (or) defripe
To smooth out.
inifòm nan n Uniform*.
inisyal la n Initial* (letter).
inite a n Unity*.
initil attrib Useless, vain, fruitless, unnecessary,
pointless.
initilman adv Uselessly.
inivèsite a n University*, college.
inondasyon an n Flood. Fè inondasyon To
overflow (river).
inonde vt To flood.
inoni, inonni attrib Gaga, senile. (syn) Entatad.
inoptize V ipnotize
inosan, nosan attrib Innocent*; naive. Cf. Neap.
nuzende innocent.
inyon an n Union*; unity*, harmony.
inyoran, iyoran attrib Ignorant*, stupid, dumb.
inyorans la, linyorans n Ignorance*, lack of
knowlege.
inyore vt To be ignorant* of.
inyore konnen vt Not to know, not to be cognizant
of. M’inyore konnen bagay konsa Am I supposed to
know that? (or) I don’t know about that.
ipnotize, inoptize vt To hypnotize*.
ipokrit attrib Hypocrit*, hypocritical*.
ipokrizi a n Hypocrisy*.
ipotèk la n Mortgage.
ipoteke, poteke vt To mortgage.
irigasyon an n Irrigation*.
irinen, rinen vi (rare) To urinate*, to piss.
V pipi, pise.
iritasyon an n Irritation*.
irite vt To irritate*. Gòj mwen irite My throat is
sore. To provoke, to rouse (to make angry); to
become irritated, to become excited.
irondèl la n Swallow (bird).
ise vt To hoist, to raise. vi To stand on tiptoe.
V rose.
isi, isit, isi a, isit la adv Here. Anba isit Down
here, in these parts. Isit, lavi a di anpil Life is
very difficult here. Moun isi People of this country,
of this place. Bò isi, bò isit Here, around here.
isitkay adv Here in this country, here at home.
isterik attrib Histerical*.
81 J
istwa a, listwa n Story*, tale. History*.
Itali n Italy*.
italyen attrib & n Italian*.
itil attrib Useful, beneficial, handy.
itilite a n Use. Li pa gen ankenn itilite It’s of no
use.
itilize vt To utilize*.
ivè a, livè n Winter. An ivè In winter, in the
winter.
izin nan, lizin n Factory. Te gen yon sèl izin nan
zòn nan, li fèmen There was only one factory in the
area; it closed up.
izole vt To isolate*.
J
ja a, dja a n Pot, jug, vat, jar*. Ja lajan Buried
treasure.
jaden an n 1. Garden*. 2. Field. Jaden roz Rose
garden Jaden kann Sugar cane field. Pale dousman;
ou pa lan jaden papa’w Speak quietly; you’re not at
home.
jadendanfan an n Nursery school.
jagon an n Jargon*. Yo pale jagon pou’m pa
konprann kisa yo vle di They spoke in a jargon, so
that I wouldn’t understand what they were saying.
Jak n James*, Jack*.
jakèt la n Formal coat with swallow tail; morning
coat. Also a rebuke. Yo ba’l yon jakèt They
rebuked him.
Jakmèl n Port town in southern Haiti.
jako a n Parrot. Fè jako pye vèt To play the part
of a gallant. Nen jako Aquiline nose.
jakorepèt la n A stupid person who, like a
parrot, repeats everything he hears.
jal n Short form for jeneral.
jalou attrib Jealous*.
jalouzi a n 1. Jealousy*; envy. Fi a ap fè jalouzi
pou mari’l The woman is jealous of her husband.
2. Type of venetian blind.
jamè V janm
jan an n Manner, way; disposition; type, kind,
sort. Li gen bon jan He has a good disposition.
Menm jan yo te rakonte’l la In the same manner as
they told it. Ki jan ou vle kafe a? How do you want
the coffee? Yon ti jan Sort of, kind of, like, slightly.
Jan ou vle As you wish. Nenpòt ki jan In any
manner. Jan’l te rich He was so rich. Pou jan ou
bon, m’pat kwè ou ta fè sa You are so good and
kind, I would have never believed you would do
that. Li yon jan dekouraje He is somewhat discouraged.
Ki jan fè... How come... Pran bon jan van
To stay in the breeze; to enjoy a good breeze.
janbe vt To cross over a street, a stream, or any
object, to straddle; to go to. Lakay li ak pa’m,
ou nèk janbe It’s only a jump from his house to
mine. Janbe minui After midnight.
janbèt la n Small knife or pen-knife with a
wooden handle.
janbon an n Ham*.
janbyè a n Leggings.
janchwa a n Anchovy.
jandam nan n Policeman, police officer; soldier.
Gendarme*.
jandamri a n Police, constabulary.
janm nan 1
n Leg. Li pran kou; li rale sou yon
janm He was beaten; he’s hobbling on one leg.
janm, jamè, janmen 2
adv Never, ever. Ou pap
janm kapab You will never be able. Mare jamè
fache To pledge never to become enemies (fall out).
Janm is used only pretonically.
jansiv la n Gum (mouth).
janti attrib Fine, kind, pleasant, gentle*, nice. Pa
janti Unkind, not nice.
janvye a n January*.
jany V anj
jap la n Bark, yapping*.
jape vi To bark, to yelp, to yap. Chen an jape tout
lannuit The dog barked all night.
japman an n Barking.
jarèt la n Ham, bend of the knee (in man),
hock (of horse, etc.). Bay jarèt To strengthen.
jasmen an, jasmendenui n Jasmine*.
jatyè a n Garter.
java a n Ulcer, a malignant sore. V maleng. Li
gen dezan ak yon java nan pye’l He’s had a terrible
sore on his foot for two years.
jaze vi To talk (badly) about, to fuss.
jazman an n Fussing, rambling, idle talk.
je a 1
n Deck, set. Yon je kat A deck of cards.
Yon je baton A good thrashing. Yon je zouti A set
of tools.
je a, zye a 2
n Eye. Je boukannen Without
eyelashes. Kale je To turn the eyelids inside out.
Ou gen je sèch You are shameless. Bat je To wink.
Je pou je Face to face. Dlo je Tears. Li gen je
chire He has slanted eyes (or) He is squint-eyed.
Je klè Awake. Rèv je klè Daydream. Voye je To
glance, to look. Voye yon ti je sou To keep an eye
on. Li gen je’l byen ouvè You can’t fool him. He
J 82
keeps his eyes open. Je pichpich Beady eyes, with
eyes half open and seemingly winking. Sa je pa wè,
kè pa tounen What you don’t see doesn’t turn your
stomach. Je pye Ankle bone. Je veron (or) je
vironn Cross-eyed, eyes that turn inward. Li gen je
klere He is bright-eyed, he is smart; you can’t fool
him. Li mouri pou je’l He died in vain. M’pa gen
je’m I don’t have my glasses. I can’t read. Li gen
je pete He is blind. Kout je A haughty look, scorn,
disregard with supercilious attitude. Koupe kout je
To look at a person, and then (when confronted with
the other person’s eyes) to look the other way disdain-
fully.
jebede, jebèdè vi To talk nonsense, to rave.
(syn) Ranse, radote.
jebichèt la, zebichèt la n Type of sieve, screen
used in the preparation of cassava.
jebourik la n Type of plant that produces a large
seed.
jedaza n Gambling.
jedi n Thursday.
jèdo a n Waterworks.
jefò a, jèfò a n 1. Effort. Cf. efò. 2. Greed,
persistence, boldness. Ou gen tròp jèfò You are
too greedy. You want too much.
jèjè vi To ramble, to talk nonsense, to speak
incoherently.
jelatin nan n Gelatine*.
jele a n Jelly*. Jele gwayav Guava jelly.
jèm nan 1
n 1. Germ*. 2. Seed, sprout, shoot.
jèm 2
V jèmen
jemekwa n Conceited ass.
jèmen 1
vi To sprout, to germinate*. Nou plante
mayi a depi de semèn, li pa jèmen We planted the
corn two weeks ago, but it didn’t sprout.
jèmen 2
, jèm attrib Kouzen jèmen First cousin
(male). Sometimes: jèm.
jèmèn attrib Kouzin jèmèn First cousin (female).
jen V juen
jèn nan 1
n Restraint, shyness. Pa fè jèn Don’t be
shy.
jèn nan 2
n Fasting.
jende V ede
jènen V jennen
jeneral la, jenneral la, jal la n General*.
jenerasyon an n Generation*. Relatives.
jenès la, jennès la n 1. Youth. 2. Loose woman.
Fi sa a se jenès This woman’s trade is prostitution.
jènfi a n Young girl, maiden.
jenga V zenga
jenifleksyon an, jounoufleksyon an n Genuflex-
ion*.
jenipaye a n Genipa*. Also: jènpa.
jenjanbrèt la n Gingerbread*.
jenjanm nan, jèjanm nan n Ginger*.
jenjeral la n Ginger ale*.
jenn, jèn attrib Young. Pi jenn nan Junior*, the
youngest one, the younger one.
jennen 1
attrib Narrow, uncomfortable. M’pa
renmen mache nan rout ki jennen I don’t like to
walk on narrow lanes. Se lan chemen jennen yo
kenbe chwal malen It’s on a narrow path that you
catch a sly horse.
jennen, jènen 2
vt 1. To hamper, to bother, to
hinder, to disturb, to corner, to inconvenience,
to embarrass. Pantalon an jennen’m My trousers
(pants) are too small. 2. (vpr) To restrain one’s
self. Pa jennen’w Make yourself quite at home.
Don’t bother. Li pa jennen’l He takes liberties.
jennjan an n Young man.
jennòm V jenòm
jennou V jenou
jenòm nan, jennòm nan n Young man, youth.
jenou an, jounou, jinou, jennou n Knee. A
jenou On one’s knee(s). Nou te pliye jounou douvan
mèt la We knelt before the master.
jenouye, ajenouye vi To kneel.
jeran an n Caretaker, manager; one in charge of
a plantation. Se msye ki jeran lakou a He is the
yard man. Tè a gen de jeran The plantation has
two overseers.
jerenons, jerenòs, jonnons Religious term (Abre-
nuntio).
jeròf V jiròf
jès la 1
n Gesture*, movement; pantomine; a
generous act, special attention. Fè jès To make
movements, gestures.
jès 2
V zès
jete vt 1. To throw away, to discard; to throw, to
cast. Tou sa ki pa bon merite jete Everything that
is not good should be thrown away. Jete yon dlo To
urinate. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-25: M’jete’m nan
laliy Pòtoprens I became a taxi driver in Port-auPrince.
2. To sprout. Pye bannann kòmanse jete
The banana tree is beginning to sprout. 3. To do
away with. Fi sa a jete twa pitit deja That woman
has already had three abortions. Voye jete To cast
away. 4. Jete vè (or) rann vè To evacuate body
worms.
jeyan an n Giant*.
jèze a n Garment of wool, silk, or the like. Kilòt
jèze Jersey slip.
83 J
Jezi V Jezikri
Jezikri, Jezi n Jesus Christ*.
ji a n Juice*.
jibis, jilbis Rèd kou jibis Erect (straight) as an
opera hat.
jibye a n Game, hunted animal.
jida V jouda
jig la n (pej) Leg. Fi a chita, jig li ouvè The
woman is sitting with her legs wide open.
jigo a n Leg of a goat or pig (to be cooked).
Jigo kabrit The hind leg (shank) of a goat. Jigo
kochon The shank of a hog.
jigote vi To squirm, to wriggle.
jigridi V majigridi
jij la n Judge*.
jijdepè a n Justice of the peace*.
jije vt To judge*.
jijinen vi To wriggle, to squirm.
jijiri a n Sesame (Sesamum orientale). Used to
make tablèt. V roroli.
jijman an n Judgement*, sentence. Nan dènye
jou, tout moun pral nan jijman On the last day,
everyone will be judged.
jile a, jilèt la n Vest.
jilepsou a n Vest.
jilèt la n (Gilette*) razor blade. V razwa.
jiman an n Mare.
jimnastik la n Physical training, gymnastics*.
jimo, jemo n Twin. The more common word is
‘marasa’.
jip la n Skirt.
jipon an n Petticoat, slip, undergarment.
jire vi To swear (oath). Yo se lénmi jire They are
avowed enemies.
jiri a n Jury*.
jiròf la, jeròf la n Clove tree. Grenn jiròf, klou
jiròf, tèt jiròf A single clove.
jiromou V joumou
jirwèt la, jiwèt la n Weathervane.
jis 1
attrib Tight.
jis, jous, jouk 2
prep Till, to, until, as far as. Jouk
la, m’pat ko konprann Till then, I hadn’t understood.
Jouk jounen jodi a To this very day. M’ap travay
ak ou jis mayi mi I’ll work for you forever (till the
corn ripens). Cf. Till the cows come home. Jiskisi
Until now. Jous kilè When, until when. M’rive
jis la a I arrived up to here.
jis, jous, jouk 3
conj Till, until. Jis li kapab Until
he can. Jis lè Until. Jis lè ou a rive Until you
arrive. Jis tan, jouk tan Until. Rete la jis tan
m’tounen Stay there until I come back.
jiska prep Till, until, up to. Jiska twazè Until
three o’clock.
jiskaske conj Until, till. Jiskaske m’tounen Until I
return(ed).
jisteman adv As a matter of fact, indeed; just*.
Jisteman konyeya Just now.
jistis V lajistis
jizye V zizye
jodi adv Today (as opposed to the following
day) in general. Ou kab rich jodi, pòv demen You
may be rich one day, poor the following day. Se jodi
li rive It’s a long time since he arrived. V jodia.
jodia, jodi a adv Today (this very day). M’wè’l
jodi a I saw him today (this very day).
jòf la n Pran jòf To peek, to take a glimpse of. Bay
jòf To give a peek. To expose what was not supposed
to be seen.
jòfi a n Garfish, sea-pike (Strongylura raphidoma).
jofre vi To peek, to steal a glimpse.
joke a n Jockey*.
jòkma a n 1. A shy lover. 2. A dumbell, an
imbecile.
jon an 1
n Reed. Cattail. Typha domingensis.
jon an 2
n Ornate baton. V majòjon.
jòn, jonn attrib Yellow, jaune*. Jòn sitron Lemon
yellow. Jòn fonse Deep yellow. Jòn abriko Orange
color, apricot color. Ri jòn To smile with a sense of
guilt, shame or concern. To grin. Jòn kon safran
Yellow as saffron.
joni vi To become yellow, yellowish.
jonis V lajonis
jonnons V jerenons
jònze a, jòn ze a n Egg yolk.
jou 1
Mete yon moun an jou To aim at s.o.
jou a 2
n Hemstitch.
jou a 3
n Day, daylight. V lajounen. Yon jou
One day; some day. Li jou It’s daylight. Kou jou
louvri At the break of day. Nan pwen jou pou sa
rive It’s not possible for that to happen. Katran,
jou pou jou Four years to the day. De jou an jou, li
tap vin pi malad From day to day he was getting
sicker and sicker.
jouda, jida n Gossip. Spy(ing), slandering. Dwèt
jouda The index finger (the pointing, betraying
finger). Fè jouda To spy (on neighbors, etc.) and
gossip about it. Ou se jouda; pa pale avè’m You’re
a traitor; don’t talk to me.
K 84
joudlan an n New year’s day. New year’s garment
(gift).
joujou a n Toy, plaything, joke. Pa pase’m nan
joujou Don’t play around (fool, joke) with me.
joujou lakomedi a n Puppet.
jouk 1
adv Even. Jouk ou tou Even you. V jis
(prep & conj).
jouk la 2
n Post (stake, picket). 2. Roost. 3. Yoke.
joukase n Daybreak.
jouke vi To roost, to perch. Kòk la jouke sou
pyebwa a The rooster perched on the tree. vt To
hoist (flags); to fetter, to tie an animal (tightly).
Jouke chwal To tie a horse close to the post.
joukensi, jiskensi, jiskisi adv Until now, up to
now, hitherto.
jouman an n Oath, profanity, insult, abuse.
joumou an, jiromou, jomon, jouroumou, n Species
of pumpkin. Cucurbita moschata. Soup joumou
Pumpkin soup.
jounal la n Newspaper (daily, weekly, monthly).
Cf. E. journal*. V lafèy.
jounalis la n Journalist*.
jounalye a n Day laborer.
jounen an, joune a n Day. V lajounen. Tout la
sent jounen The whole day long. Malad la pase yon
bòn joune The patient had a good day.
jounou V jenou
jounoufleksyon V jenifleksyon
joupa V ajoupa
joure 1
vt To insult, to abuse, to curse, to taunt;
to scold, to grumble at, to reprimand, to rebuke.
Depi maten ou ap joure’m You’ve been grumbling
at me since (this) morning. Li joure vwazen an
byen joure He really lambasted his neighbor. He
really gave his neighbor a piece of his mind. vi To
quarrel. Y’ap joure They are quarreling.
joure a 2
n Insult; argument.
jouroumou V joumou
jous V jis
jouvajouvyen, jou va jou vyen The days come
and go (time does not stand still).
juen, jen n June*.
juif la, jwif la n Jew*. attrib Jewish*.
juiyè, jiyè, jiye n July*.
jwa a, lajwa n Joy*.
jwe vt 1. To play. 2. To gamble. Jwe sou To bet
on. M’ap jwe sou ou I am betting on you. Jwe
dwèt ou ladan’l jous ou a louvri’l Wiggle your
finger in it till you open it.
jwè a, jwa a n Player, gambler.
jwen 1
n Means, manner, way, mode. M’pat gen
jwen pou’m fè sa I didn’t find a way to do that.
jwen an 2
n Opening, crack.
jwenn vt To find; to discover; to obtain; to
meet; to locate. To join* up with. Jwenn ak To
meet (up) with, to encounter. An’n al jwenn papa
ou Let’s go meet (go to) your daddy. Ou a jwenn ak
zo grann ou You are too curious, you will find what
you are not looking for.
jwenti a n Joint* (connecting bones), articulation.
jwèt la n 1. Toy. 2. Play(ing) game, joke, diversion,
amusement, prank, entertainment. 3. Game of
chance, gambling. Examples and expressions:
Kay jwèt Doll house (also: kay pope). Fè jwèt
To be kidding. Non jwèt Nickname, pet name. Sa
se yon jwèt It’s a joke; it’s not serious; you must be
kidding. Jwèt kay (or) Jwèt kay wari Children’s
game played with pebbles or ‘wari’ seeds. (Haitian
version of the game known in West Africa by
such names as Wari and Mungolla: COURLANDER).
Pran yon moun fè jwèt Not to take s.o.
seriously; to kid s.o. Jwèt la gate It’s time for a
show-down, the kidding is over. (Said when the
government is going down).
jwi vt To enjoy. vi To reach orgasm.
jwif V juif
jwisans la n Enjoyment.
jwisè a n Reveller, carouser, one who always
puts pleasure above work.
K
k Contraction of ki (subject relative pronoun).
BEAUBRUN/A-32: Wi, se Mariz k’ap pale avèk
ou la Yes, it’s Marise who is talking to you.
ka 1
vi To be able (to). Ou pa ka reyisi You can’t
succeed. Also: kab, kapab.
ka 2
n Short form of kay at the house of. M’pral
ka Andre I am going to Andre’s (house). Ka may
not be used before a possessive adjective; lakay
is used instead. M’pral lakay mwen I am going
home. V kay, lakay.
ka a 3
n 1. Case* (situation, instance, circumstance).
2. Mishap, death, misfortune, crisis,
trouble. 3. Case* (legal). Examples and expressions:
An ka In case that. An tou ka In any
event (case). Se yon ka ki ra It’s a rare case. Se lò
yon moun nan ka ou konn vrè zanmi ou It’s when
you’re in trouble that you discover your real friends.
M’pa fè ka’l I don’t pay any attention to him.
M’konprann ka yo I understand their situation.
ka a 4
n 1. Quart*. 2. Quarter*. Yon ka dè A
quarter of an hour.
85 K
kab 1
vi To be able to. V ka, kapab.
kab la 2
n Maneuver, fake (in sports).
kab la 3
n 1. Telegram, cablegram*. 2. Cable*
(metal wire).
kaba vt To finish, to exhaust, to put an end to;
to be all gone, exhausted. From Sp. acaba(do).
Jouk sa kaba Till the very end.
kabal la n Raucous, row (quarel), uproar, commotion,
cabala* (universal Hebraism). V lobo,
eskandal.
kabalè attrib Noisy, boisterous, argumentative.
kabalèz attrib Boisterous, noisy. (Used for wom-
en).
kabann nan n Bed, bedding. Kabann nan dous
The bed is soft and sweet. Ranje kabann To make
the bed; to prepare one’s future, to plan, so as to be
sure to succeed.
kabare a 1
n Serving tray, platter, saucer.
kabare a, kabarè a 2
n Cabaret*, night club.
kabès la n Head. Also: kabès tèt. Yon nonm ki
gen kabès An intelligent person. V dekabès.
kabeste vt To train, to discipline (a child); to
train (a horse).
kabich la n Paté consisting of bread with aransò
in it (Jérémie region).
kabicha 1
vi To take a nap, to snooze, to doze.
Cf. Sp. cabecea(r); Neap. capezzià, lit. with the
head drooping. Li pa dòmi yè swa; l’ap ka-bicha
He didn’t sleep last night; he’s dozing off (napping).
kabicha a 2
n Snooze, nap.
kabin nan n Small room, hut (rare), cabin* (on
a boat), booth.
kabine V okabine
kabinè a, kabine a n 1. Practice (of a lawyer),
office. 2. Cabinet (ministry).
kabinèt la n Small room, office, cabinet*.
kabiratè a n Carburator*.
kabòch la, kabòs la n Head. Also: kabòch tèt.
kabòn nan n Carbon* paper. Also: papye kabòn.
kabonat la n Baking soda.
kabòs 1
V kabòch
kabòs la 2
n Cocoa-pod, chocolate-nut. V kalabous,
gous.
kabotay la, gabotay la n Coastal traffic transporting
people and merchandise by boat within the coun-
try.
kabourèt la, kabrèt la, kabwèt la n A two or
three-wheeled cart. When three-wheeled, it has
one wheel in front and two in rear, similar to a
wheel-barrow.
kabouya a, kabouyay la n Rompus, loud noise,
public scandal, quarrel, dispute. Fè kabouya To
raise a storm, to cause a big fuss. Li pete yon
kabouya avè’m He started a quarrel with me.
kabouyatik attrib Quarrelsome, boisterous.
kabray la n Maneuver, fake (in sports). Cf. kab.
kabre vt Verb used in the terminology of sports
(to fake).
kabrèt V kabwèt
kabrit la n Goat. Kabrit san kòn Human being.
Vyann kabrit Goat’s meat. Ou gen bouch kabrit
You predicted that; what you foresee usually really
happens. Belye kabrit Buck (male goat). Manman
kabrit Nanny goat. Ti kabrit Kid.
kabwa a n Large cart used to haul heavy loads
like sugar cane. Ou se yon bèf kabwa You are
working very hard for others who are exploiting you.
kabwatye a, kabwetye a n One who pulls or
pushes a kabwèt.
kabwèt la, kabrèt la n Long cart drawn by horses
or oxen, go-cart, wagon. Kabwèt la chaje kann
The wagon is loaded with sugarcane.
kach la 1
n 1. Foreskin (prepuce). 2. The end
of a string attached to a piece of wood. This is
usually called fwèt kach which one cracks and
uses to corral animals.
kach la 2
n Cash*. Peye cash To pay cash.
kache 1
vt & vi To hide, to conceal. Li kache; li
kache kò’l He is hiding (himself). Lago kache
Hide and seek.
kache a, kachè a 2
n Pill, capsule; cachet*.
kachèt la n Hiding-place. An kachèt Secretly.
kachiman an n Sweetsop. Annona squamosa L,
Annona reticulata L. Gen plizyè kalite kachiman
There are various types of sweetsop: kachiman kannèl,
kachiman lachin, kachiman kè bèf, etc.
kachimbo a n Rustic smoking pipe.
kachkach la n 1. Secret hiding place. 2. Jwèt
kachkach The game of ‘hide and seek’. Kachkach li
ben sere li ben Children’s game in which an
object is hidden in the hand of one of the players.
The other players must guess in whose hand the
object was placed. V lago.
kacho a n Prison cell.
kachotri a n Affected secrecy about trifles.
kachotye attrib Secretive.(Rare). Si’m te kachotye,
gen bagay m’pa ta di ou If I were secretive, there
are things I shouldn’t tell you.
kachte vt To seal an envelope. Kachte kou ou
Button up, bundle up. V dekachte.
kad la 1
n Trundlebed, which can fold up.
kad la 2
n Frame.
K 86
kadache V kodase
kadans la, lakadans n Cadence*, rhythm, manner
of movement.
kadanse vi To go back and forth in cadence.
kadav la n Body, corpse, cadaver*; self. M’pral
repoze kadav mwen I am going to rest my body.
Nan lagè se sou kadav moun mache During war
times, you walk on corpses.
kadejak la, akadejak la n Rape, assault. Li fè
kadejak sou tifi a He raped the girl.
kaderik la n Cooking pot (used in the North).
kadinal la n Squirrel fish.
kadna a n Padlock.
kadnase vt To padlock.
kado a n 1. Gift, present. Fè kado To make a
present, to give away, to give out. 2. White spot
on a fingernail.
kadre vt To center and frame. Matched, fitted.
Yo byen kadre They’re well set; they match (each
other).
kafe a n 1. Coffee*. Coffea arabica L. FARDIN-8:
Pi bèl pase yon bèl rekòlt kafe More beautiful than
a beautiful coffee harvest. Kafe ole a) Light brown
coffee (with cream). b) Light brown (color). Kafe
seriz Coffee bean. Kafe klè Light coffee. Kafe an
poud Ground coffee. Grèp (or) grèg kafe Coffee
filter. Griye kafe To roast coffee. Ma kafe Coffee
dregs, coffee grounds. Moulen kafe Coffee grinder.
Fè kafe To brew coffee. Kafe’l koule ak ma He is
in trouble. Bwè yon kafe anmè ak yon moun To
settle a score with s.o. Pye kafe Coffee bush, coffee
tree. Kafe rat Coffee beans on the coffee bush which
fall out of the husks, because they have been chewed
by rats.
kafetyè a, kaftyè a n Coffee pot.
kafou a, kalfou a n Crossroad, street corner,
intersection. Kalfou tenten Fool’s corner, the juncture
in life where everything goes wrong.
kage vi To recline, to sit leaning the chair against
a tree or a wall.
kagezon an n Cargo*, shipload. Kagezon maladi
A long, complex illness. (usu) chay maladi.
kagou attrib Depressed, sad, weak, lifeless. Sa ou
genyen ou kagou konsa? Gee but you look sad!
What’s the matter with you?
kagoul la n Hood, mask.
kaj la n Cage* (for large animals). Much more
common is kalòj which (usu) means bird
cage.
kajou a, akajou a 1
n West Indies mahogany.
kajou a, pòm kajou a 2
n Cashew* (Anacardium
occidentale L.). Nwa kajou Cashew nut.
kaka 1
vi 1. To shit, to defecate, to have a bowel
movement. 2. To fail. Cf. okabine, poupou,
tata.
kaka a 2
n Excrement, feces, shit, bowel movement,
stool. Fè kaka To have a bowel movement. Kaka
kalbas The inside of a calabash. Se pa kaka kòk
It’s not easy. It’s not chicken shit. Kaka bèf Cow
dung. Kaka je Wax around the eyes. Kaka nen
Snot. Tou sa se kaka rat dèyè bwèt All that means
nothing. Kaka zòrèy Cerumen, wax in the ears.
Mete tout kaka chat deyò To spill the beans. To let
the secret out.
kakade vi To fart around, to bullshit, to talk
nonsense.
kakadja vi To criticize, to speak evil of.
kakajako attrib Yellowish green.
kakan an n A wooden yoke used to prevent
animals from passing through a hedge; it consists
of a triangular piece of wood placed around the
neck with a horizontal bar.
kakao a, kakaro a n Cocoa*.
kakarat la n Tiny sugar grains in various colors
used to decorate cakes.
kakarèl la n Diarrhea.
kakas la n Carcass*; skeleton of a paper kite.
V zosman.
kakatwè a n A person, (usu) a child, who soils
himself.
kakaye vi To cackle (hens). V kodase.
kaki a n Khaki*.
kakit (euph) for ‘kaka’. To fail. Finished, done
for. Yo fè msye kakit They’ve done him in.
kaklika n Trouble, problem. Ala de kaklika!
What troubles!
kako a n 1. Small, stinging type of insect, found
in latrines without water or in other unsanitary
places. 2. Revolutionary. Name given to a group
of people who many years ago participated in a
revolt against American occupation forces and
in the civil wars that took place in the beginning
of this century.
kakòn nan n 1. Type of plant. Mimosa scandens
L. Kakòn jenou Knee bone.
kal la 1
n 1. Beating, thrashing, defeat. 2. The
hard peal of a fruit or grain. 3. Fish scales.
4. Flake (paint). Fè kal To peal off (paint).
5. Dandruff. 6. The hard covering of the rapadou
(hardened syrup). 7. Yon kal, yon ti kal A tiny
bit, a scrap, a tiny piece, a crum.
kal la 2
n Hold of a ship. Sometimes: lakal.
kalabous la n 1. Jail, prison. 2. Cacao-pod,
chocolate-nut. V kabòs.
87 K
kalalou a n Okra. In some regions of Haiti,
kalalou is called gonbo. Ase fouye zo nan kalalou
Stop asking questions, stop being indiscreet.
kalao interj Damn it! Hispanism from Santo
Domingo or Cuba. Sp. carajo!
kalapat V karapat
kalbas la n Calabash*; gourd. Crescentia cujete
L. Tèt kalbas Big head. Kalbas gran dyòl Big
talker, one who can’t keep a secret, a big mouth.
kalbasi a, kalbasik la n A green fruit with a hard
covering.
kalbenday la n Loafing, waste of time.
kalbende vi To waste time when working, to
loaf.
kalbose, kabose, kolboso vt To dent, to bump,
to bruise, to crack, to get out of shape, to chip.
Machin mwen kalbose My car got dented.
kale 1
vi 1. To stall, to konk out (engine, car).
2. To hatch (egg).
kale 2
vt 1. To flog, to whip, to spank, to lash, to
beat up. 2. To win over, to defeat. 3. To peel,
to skin (bananas, sugar cane), to shell (peas),
to pare (fruit). The general meaning is to remove
the cover of anything. 4. To produce, to give
birth to (as in kale pitit to give birth to many
children. Examples and expressions: Kale’m
lajan’m Give me my money, now! Kale tèt yon
moun To shave s.o.’s head. Yo kale tèt ou They
plucked your scalp. They scalped you, i.e. they took
too much money from you. Tèt kale A shaven head
(or) a person of no importance. Soulye a ap
kale’m My shoes are really hurting me; they’re
giving me a hard time. Kale je To turn one’s
eyelids inside out (sometimes done by children when
playing); also to look at s.o. defiantly or insistently.
Pa kale je ou sou mwen You better stop looking at
me like that.
kalewès, kale wès vi To loaf around, doing
nothing; to work slowly or lazily, playing-like.
Tout lajounen ou pap travay; ou ap kalewès All day
long you’re not working; you’re loafing and loitering.
kalfou V kafou
kalib la n Caliber*. Li kalib It works O.K.
kaliko a n Calico* (cloth).
kalimèt la n Straw (for drinking). Kalimèt pip
Pipe stem.
kalinda a n Calenda*, type of dance imported
from Africa. Lè chat pa la, rat bay kalinda When
the cat’s away, the mice are at play. Bay kalinda
To frolic.
kaliptis V ekaliptis
kalite a n 1. Quality*. Kòk kalite Quality game
cock. 2. Variety, kind, type, sort. Kalite bat yo te
konn bat li They used to beat him so much.
kalkil la n 1. Computation, account, calculation*,
reckoning, consideration; arithmetic. 2. Mental
problem, worry. Si ou panse tròp, ou a gen kalkil
If you think too much (by yourself in your corner),
you’ll have a psychosis. 3. Gallstone.
kalkilasyon an n Reflection, worry.
kalkile vt & vi To reckon, to compute, to figure
(out), to count, to consider, to ponder over, to
calculate*. M’ap kalkile kote m’prale I’m pondering
over where I’m going.
kalm 1
attrib Calm*, quiet, peaceful.
kalm nan 2
n Calm*, quiet.
kalma vi To calm* down.
kalmason an, kalmanson an n 1. Snail. 2. Core
of a boil, the central mass of necrotic tissue.
V pi, amòtif.
kalme vt To calm*, to appease, to calm down,
to sooth. vpr To calm down; to subside (storm).
kalmi an, akalmi an, lakalmi n Stillness, calm*;
lull in business.
kalòj la n Cage (for small animals, especially
birds). Kalòj pijon Loft.
kalomèl la n Calomel* (Mercurous chloride).
kalonnen vt To stone, to throw stones at, to pelt
with stones.
kalòt la n Box on the ears; a slap on the head
with the open hand.
kalote vt To slap s.o. on the head.
kalsitran V rekalsitran
kalson an n Drawers, underwear, briefs.
kalvè a n 1. Calvary*. 2. Suffering, difficulties,
problems. Se yon kalvè n’ap pase avè’l We’re
really having a hard time with him.
kamarad la, kanmarad la n Friend, mate, companion,
comrade*. Kostim mwen an pa kanmarad
pa ou la My suit is better than yours.
kamaradri a n Comradeship*.
kaminize vpr Kaminize ou Fork it over. Give me all
you’ve got.
kamizòl la, kanmizòl la n Undershirt worn by
small children.
kamomi an, kamomin nan n Camomille*. Medicinal
plant.
kamouflaj la, kamouflay la n Camouflage*.
kamyon an, kanmyon an n Truck; an open bus
with rows of benches. Kamyon bwat Truck with
wooden box in rear. Kamyon fatra Trash truck.
Kamyon baskil Dump truck. Kamyon sitèn Tank
truck.
kamyonèt la n A type of jitney, a cross betwen a
small truck and a car; station-wagon. V taptap.
K 88
kan 1
conj When. Kan m’rive, m’pa wè’l When I
arrived, I did not see him.
kan an 2
n 1. Edge (of doors, beds, etc.).
kan an 3
n 1. Camp*. 2. The goal area (in
soccer). 3. Team; side. An’n fè de kan Let’s
choose two sides (teams). Fè kan (sou) To gossip
(about).
kana a, kanna a n 1. Duck. 2. Harvest fish.
kanal la, kannal la n 1. Ditch, canal*; open
gutter for leading water to sewer. 2. Jocularly
refers to a woman’s or a man’s water system.
kanale V kannale
kanape a n Sofa, lounge.
kanari a, kannari a n Small, earthen jar, clay-pot,
terra-cotta earthen vessel. ‘Kanaris also enter
into ritual use. They are sung into, tapped with
sticks, and on some occasions are covered with
goatskin heads and played like a drum’ (COUR-
LANDER).
kanaval la n Mardi-gras, carnival*.
kanbiz la n Any place where foods and drinks
are served at a gathering; the steward’s roof,
reception hall. At a dance, the corner where
drinks are served is called bivèt. Chèf kanbiz
Chief receptionist; the person in charge of food and
drinks at a party.
kanbizye a n Steward’s mate. One who serves
(or sells) food at a kanbiz. Also: chèf kanbiz.
kanbral attrib Bowlegged. One with arched legs.
Mache kanbral To hobble along, to walk in a funny
manner, perhaps because of a defect in one’s legs.
kanbre attrib Arched, bowed. Pye kanbre Bent,
bowed, arched, curving legs.
kandelab la, kandelam nan n A type of cactus
so-named because of its shape. Euphorbia lactea.
kandida a n Candidate*.
kandidati a n Candidacy*. Li poze kandidati’l He
is running for office.
kandyanroun nan, kandyanhoun nan n A major
Vodou service. Bat kandyanhoun To invite people
to have a grand celebration.
Kandyo n Famous Haitian singer and comedian,
author of many songs.
kanè a n Notebook, report card (school). Kanè
adrès Address book. Kanè chèk Checkbook.
kanèl la, kannèl la n 1. Cinnamon. 2. Rust
(color).
kanèt la n Bobbin, spool of sewing machine
placed under the material to be sewn. V bobin.
kanf la n Camphor*. Rale kanf To inhale camphor.
kanfeti, kanti conj (pop) Even if, if. Kanfeti ou ta
peye’m, m’pap fè sa Even if you would pay me, I
wouldn’t do that.
kangrenn V gangrenn
kangrennen V gangrennen
kanif la, kannif la n Penknife, pocket-knife.
kanik la, kannik la n 1. Marble (play). 2. A
small, spherical black fruit used for playing mar-
bles.
kanistè a, kannistè a n Tin container used to
measure flour, grain, salt, etc. Mostly used in
the North.
kanivo a, kannivo a n Channel-stone, gutter.
kankannen vi To burn thoroughly, to char.
kankou V tankou
kanmenm, kamenm adv Anyway, in any case,
just the same.
kann nan n Sugar cane*. Kann kale Sugar cane
with the bark removed. Se ak kann yo fè sik ak siro
They make sugar and syrup out of sugar cane.
kannale, kanale vi To go. Kannale dèyè To follow
in the wake of. Kannale monte To go up (the way).
kannannant, annannant attrib Lifeless, listless,
without energy.
kannay la n Scoundrel. Sometimes refers to an
old man who runs after young girls. Granmoun
kannay Old rascal, dirty old man.
kanni vi To mildew, to become old and mouldy.
Also: to get gray hair.
kanno V kanon
kannòt la n (Small) boat, canoe*.
kanntè a n Flimsy, unseaworthy boat used for
clandestine trips, mostly to the US.
kanon an, kannon an, kanno a n Big gun, cannon*.
Nèg sa a se kanno That fellow is a genius (sometimes
pej.).
kanpay la, kanpany la n 1. Campaign*. Li pèdi
lan kanpay fi a He was madly in love with the girl.
2. Lakanpay Countryside.
kanpe vi 1. To stand up, to rise; to be standing,
to be erect. 2. To stop walking. Apre sa li kanpe
After that, he stopped walking. Mete bwat la kanpe
Stand the box on end.
kanpèch la n Campeachy* wood, logwood. Haematoxylum
campechianum L.
kanpekin nan n A beverage which is supposed
to restore virility.
kanpelwen an n Moth balls. Also: An evil-smelling
herb, and a lotion made from an ammonia base,
used to chase away evil spirits.
89 K
kanpo a n Rest (repose). Bay kanpo To relieve
s.o. Pran kanpo To take a rest.
kansè a n Cancer*.
kanson an n Pair of pants, trousers, shorts.
Walking shorts are usually called pantalon kout
or chòt. M’achte senk kanson yè I bought five
pairs of pants yesterday. Yon gason kanson A real
man.
kanta, kanta pou prep As for, as far as...is con-
cerned.
kantaloup la n Cantaloup*.
kantamwa attrib Presumptious, haughty, preten-
tious.
kanti V kanfeti
kantik la n Hymn, canticle*. MORISSEAULEROY/D-10:
Tout ti medam ap al chante kantik
All the young ladies are going to sing religious
hymns.
kantin nan n 1. Canteen* (establishment) where
free meals are served. 2. A holder for several
plates to transport food.
kantite a n 1. Quantity*, amount. 2. A good deal
of, plenty of, a lot of, scores of. DEJEAN-55: Fè
yo fè sa li di a, yo pran yon gran kantite pwason
Once they had done what he had said, they caught a
lot of fish. Ki kantite kòb li genyen? How much
money does he have?
kanton an n District, canton*. FARDIN-10: Se
kanton’m, apantè This is my district, surveyor.
kantonnye a n Street-cleaner, garbage man, road-
man.
kanyan kanyan, kanyen kanyen adv Gawky, ungainly,
sickly, wobbling. PAURIS-4: Yon kokennchenn
parantèz simaye pasi pala, kanyen kanyen.
kanzo attrib A Vodou adept who has undergone
the trial by fire initiation. Said of any person
who is not easily burned.
kaotchou a, kaoutchou, karotchou n 1. Rubber.
2. Rubber tire. Karotchou de rechanj Spare tire.
Karotchou plat (or) pàn karotchou Flat tire.
kap la 1
n Paper kite (for flying). M’ap monte kap
I’m flying my kite. V sèvolan, grandou.
kap la 2
n Cape (Geog). Mete kap sou To head
toward.
kap la 3
n A plant whose leaves are used as a
remedy to cure jaundice. Tribulus cistoïdes L.
kap la 4
n 1. Flaky crust on the head of a new-born
baby. 2. Dandruff.
kap 5
V kapab
kapab, kab, kap, ka vi To be able, can; may. Pa
kapab Unable, not able. Anyen pa kapab fè yo
chanje Nothing could make them change.
kapital la, lakapital n Capital city.
kapitèn nan, kaptenn nan 1
n Hogfish. Lachnolaimus
maximus.
kapitèn nan, kaptenn, kapi a 2
n Captain*; team
captain.
kaplata a, kaprata a n Sorcerer.
kapo a 1
n Hood (car). Fèmen kapo a Close the
hood. Kapo rou Hubcap.
kapo 2
V kaporal
kapon attrib Coward(ly), timid, scared, fainthearted.
Si yo pat kapon yo ta gen batay la If they
hadn’t been such cowards, they would have won the
battle.
kaponnay la, kraponnay, kanponnay n Intimidation,
‘scaring tactics’.
kaponnen, kraponnen, kanponnen vt To scare
off, to intimidate, to scare by means of threats.
M’pa janm kite moun kaponnen’m I never let anyone
scare me off.
kaporal la, kapo a n 1. Corporal*. 2. Type of
marble (toy).
kapòt la n 1. Top, roof (of cars). 2. Head
covering, hairdo. 3. Condom, ‘rubbers’, contra-
ceptive.
kapote vi To capsize, to overturn. Kamyon an
kapote nan ravin nan The truck turned over into a
ravine.
kaprina a n 1. Woman lacking some front teeth.
2. Prostitute, loose woman.
kapris la n Whim, capricious* act.
kapsil la n Caps*, tablet.
kapte vt To tune to (a radio station).
kar conj Because, for. (The letter “r” is distinctively
pronounced in this Creole word).
kara a n Carat*.
karabann nan n Birdtrap made from sticks forming
a pyramid.
karabela a n Denim material.
karabin nan n Rifle, gun, carbine*.
karaf la n Jug, pitcher.
karako a n A long wide housedress similar to a
night gown.
karakole, krakole vi To cut capers, to jump
about (horse).
karaktè a n Character*, nature, temper. Fanm sa
a gen move karaktè This woman is a bad character
(has a bad temper). PAURIS-113: Manmzèl ranmase
karaktè’l She became offended, hurt and angry.
karamèl la n Caramel*.
K 90
karang nan n 1. Type of body lice that suck
blood. 2. Common jack. Caranx hippos, a gray
and white fish.
karanklou a n Vulture. Lèd kon karanklou Ugly
as a vulture. Manje kou karanklou To swallow
like a glutton.
karanndiseas la n Type of venereal disease (The
person has various individual diseases).
karannkat la n Revolver.
karant num Forty.
karantyèm num Fortieth.
karapat la 1
n Shell (of a turtle).
karapat la, kalapat la 2
n 1. Louse, tick. 2. A
person who is a pain in the ass.
karata a n Type of agave or sisal. Agave intermixta
Trel.
karate a n Karate*.
karatèl la, karetèl la n Highway. (From Sp.
‘carretera’. This word is used in the central re-
gion).
karavachè a n Guzzler, drunkard. V grògmann,
banbochè, tafyatè.
karayib la, chou karayib la n Taro. Colocasia
esculenta Schott. A plant of the Arum family.
kare 1
attrib Outspoken, straightforward, frank.
Cf. He is a square shooter.
kare 2
attrib Square*.
kare 3
vt 1. To bring face to face, to sick on, to
match (two game cocks); to match (a man and
a woman). 2. To put one’s mind to, to go at it.
Nou fèk kare manje We have been eating, and we
have plenty more to go. 3. Kare kò To settle one’s
self comfortably.
kare a 4
n 1. Square*. 2. Penalty zone (soccer).
3. Type of modern dance.
karèm nan n Lent.
kareman adv Definitely, squarely, absolutely, flatly,
categorically.
karèn nan, karenn nan n Keel (of a boat). Mete
yon batiman an karèn To keel a ship.
karès la n Caress*.
karesan attrib Caressing*.
karese vt To fondle, to cajole, to cuddle, to
caress*, to hug, to pet.
karèt 1
attrib Temporarily submissive (applied to
one who concedes, or shies away).
karèt la 2
n 1. Large, edible sea-tortoise, waterturtle.
2. Type of torture in a jail.
kareti a n Breadth across the shoulders.
kari a n Breadth of back and shoulders. Nonm
nan gen bèl kari The man has broad shoulders. He
is well built.
karo a n 1. Diamond (cards). 2. Iron (for
pressing clothes) (The word karo is used only
in some parts of Haiti. In the capital, the name
is fè). 3. Any square window pane, or floor
tile. 4. Strip of land measuring about 3.19 acres.
karosri a n Chassis.
karòt la n Carrot*.
karotay la n Bumping (of a moving vehicle).
karousèl la n Carousel*.
karyann nan n A terrain full of rocks, stones,
etc.
karye vt To carry.
karyoka a n Low, flat shoe with leather straps.
V sandal, sapat.
karyòl la n Wagon, van, cart.
karyonnen, kayonnen vi To ring, to chime, to
peel (bells).
kas la 1
n Cassia* (a plant the seeds of which are
used as a medecine).
kas la 2
n Helmet.
kasav la, kasab la n Cassava*. Yo fè kasab ak
manyòk They make cassava with manioc.
Kasayòl n Name of a wise man often mentioned
in Haitian proverbs, sayings, etc. Cf. E. Confucius
say(s).
kase 1
vt 1. To break; to break to pieces; to
break (a large bill); to pick (corn). 2. To dismiss,
to fire (from a job). 3. To burglarize (a house).
Examples and expressions: Kase tèt tounen To
turn back and go in the other direction, to turn
about. Chwal la kase kòd The horse snapped the
rope. Malad la kase kòd The patient died (kicked
the bucket). Kase bra To break an arm (or) To
discourage s.o. Kase zòtèy To stump one’s toe.
Kase koub To turn. Kase lèzo To break water
(just before a child is born). Kase bwa nan zòrèy
yon fi To whisper sweet nothings in a woman’s ear.
Kase kanari A funeral Vodou rite.
kase 2
vi To break, to give way. Examples and
expressions: Kase a gòch To turn left. Kase
double To begin again, to continue, to go on. Chapo’l
kase byen ba sou je’l His hat was pulled down over
his eyes. Kè kase Surprise, deep emotion, causing
the heart to beat fast. Lè jou ap kase At the break of
day.
kasèdkay la n Burglar, housebreaker.
kasik la n American Indian native chief. Big
boss (pejorative and rare).
kaskad la n Waterfall.
kaskayèt la n Castanet*.
91 K
kaskèt la n Cap, particularly for officers.
kasròl la, kastròl la n Pan, saucepan, casserole*.
kastronnen, kastonnen vt 1. To give a new shape
to a hat by twisting it. 2. To dress (train) a
horse.
kat 1
num Four. (before a vowel: katr)
Katr an Four years.
kat la 2
n 1. Card*; identification card*. M’ba ou
kat blanch I give you full authority to act. 2. Map.
3. Ticket (admittance). Li ban’m de kat sinema
He gave me two tickets for the movies. 4. Playing
card*. Kat la make The card is marked. Se ou ki
pou koupe kat la It’s up to you to cut the cards.
Doye kat To be able to tell cards through markings
on their back. L’al fè yo tire kat pou li He had his
fortune told with playing cards. File kat To deal
cards. Yon zèl kat One single card. Gen yon move
kout kat ki pati Something went wrong.
kat san num 400. A large number; an inordinate
amount.
kata 1
vi To play ‘kata’ music.
kata 2
attrib Underdeveloped, puny (child).
kata a 3
n Type of drum, rythm, dance.
katab la n A folder to carry documents.
katafal la n Hearse, catafalque*. Yon katafal
bagay Any huge, big object.
katalòg la n Catalogue*.
kataplas la n Cataplasm*.
katapoli a n Sandpaper (word used mostly in
the North). Elsewhere: papye sable.
katarak la n Cataract* (disease of the eye).
katastròf la n Catastrophy*.
katchapika a n Long knife, dagger.
katchoumbonmbe a n Fiasco, trouble, predic-
ament.
katdidantite a n Identification card*.
katechis la n Catechism*.
katedral la n Cathedral*. MORISSEAU-LEROY-18:
Kimoun ki pral katedral? Who is going to the
cathedral?
kategori a n Category*, class, group.
katimini V ankatimini
katkat la, ti katkat la n Little tot, todler.
katolik 1
attrib Catholic*. Pa katolik Not completely
proper, not authentic, not honest.
katolik la 2
n Catholic*.
katon an n Cardboard; carton*.
katouch la n Cartridge*.
katòz num Fourteen.
katpostal la n Post card*.
katreven num Eighty.
katreven dis num Ninety.
katriyèm num Fourth.
katye a n 1. Quarter* (of the moon). 2. Neighborhood;
section. Cf. E. (soldier’s) living quarters*.
Kay sa a fè katye a lèd This house ruins the
neighborhood.
kav la n 1. Grotto, cave*, hole in the rock.
2. Grave, tomb. V kavo.
kavalye a n 1. Horseman, rider. 2. Male dancing
partner.
kavalyèz la n Female dancing partner.
kave vi To drink heavily. Tout lannuit la, mesye
yo rete ap kave The men kept drinking all night
long.
kavèn nan n Cave, cavern*.
kavo a n Grave, burial vault, tomb with burial
vault.
kaw la n Crow (large black bird). Mèg kon kaw
To be very skinny.
kay la 1
n House; hut. Kay tòl House with tin
(corrugated) roof. Kay chanmòt Two-storey house.
Kay mistè Room in a house or a small house reserved
for the household gods. Shrine. Kay bas A one-storey
house as opposed to ‘kay rot’, a house with an upper
storey. Kay pay Thatched roof hut. M’pral kay
madan Viktò I’m going to the w. c. Dèyè kay
(euph) for a woman’s backside. Chat kay Domestic
cat (as opposed to) chat maron wild cat.
kay la 2
n Quail*.
kay, ka 3
prep At the home of, at -’s. Li mouri kay
yon notab He died at the home of a well-known,
important person. Cf. lakay.
kaye 1
vi To clot, to curdle. Cf. coagulate. Fredi
a kaye deyò a It’s very cold outside.
kaye 2
a n Notebook, copybook.
kayiman an n Caiman* (type of crocodile, related
to the alligator).
kayimit la, kaymit la n Common star-apple, soft
and pulpy, green or violet in color (tropical
fruit). Chrysophyllum caimito L.
kazak la n 1. Robe, gown, large shirt. 2. A
baby’s gown, swaddling clothes.
kazèn nan n Barracks (Milit).
kazimi an n Cashmere* (fine material used to
make clothes).
kazino a n Casino* (gambling place).
K 92
kazuèl, kazwèl attrib Apathetic, casual*, listless,
timid with women; lazy; clumsy at shooting mar-
bles.
ke 1
rel pron That, which, whom. M’tande paròl
(ke) ou di yo I heard the words (that) you said.
(Object relative pronoun ke may be omitted).
ke 2
conj That (it may be omitted). M’te kwè (ke)
ou tap vini I thought (that) you were coming.
ke a, tye a, tche a 3
n Tail. Ke ròb Tail of a
dress. Ke lanmori Tails (formal dress suit). Long
kon yon ke pis, li tap mouri He barely missed
dying.
kè a, tyè a, tchè a n 1. Heart, courage. Se kè
m’pran ki fè m’pa kouri I took courage and did not
run away. Kè kontan Joy, peace, happiness. Kè
sere, kè grenn Chagrin, sorrow. Nouvèl la ban’m
kè plen That news made me lose my appetite. Nan
kè’m To myself. Kè’m te sou bikèt mwen I was so
anxious, so apprehensive. Li gen kè cho He is very
impatient. Li gen bon kè He is kind-hearted, goodhearted.
Li gen kè di He is hard-hearted. Aprann
pa kè To memorize, to learn by heart (from memory).
Odè a ban’m kè tounen The bad smell turned my
stomach. Nèg sa a kèpòpòz This man is relaxed,
completely at ease; he has no worries. 2. Choir.
3. Heart(s) (cards).
kechat la n Cat’s tail. (Ornamental plant with a
long stem).
kèk 1
adv About. Senkant e kèk About fifty, a little
more than fifty.
kèk 2
indef adj Some, a few. Kèk moun A few
people. Kèk fwa A few times.
keksyon V kestyon
kèlkeswa, kèlkanswa indef adj Whatever.
kèlkilanswa adv At any rate.
kèlkonk indef adj Some, any, whatever.
kèmès la n Bazaar (fair most often organized by
schools).
kenbe vt 1. To hold, to grasp, to grip, to take
hold of. 2. To contain, to hold. 3. To keep, to
store. 4. To capture. 5. To withhold. Examples
and expressions: Kenbe kle a Hold the key. Kenbe,
pa lage Hold tight; don’t let go. Keep the faith. Se
pou ou kenbe kò ou You have to refrain yourself.
Pipi kenbe’m I have to take a leak. Maryaj kenbe’l
The idea of getting married has got him. Ou ap
ban’m kenbe You are putting me on. Kenbe yon
moun nan kè To have a grudge against s.o.
kenedi a n Second hand (clothing, shoes, etc.).
From E. Pres. Kennedy*.
kenèp la, kennèp la n Tropical fruit with a large
seed. Melicocca bijuga L.
kenkay la n Odds and ends. Bak kenkay A tray
full of all kinds of articles for sale.
kenken Fè kenken To abound, to be plentiful.
Kenskòf n Village on the heights of Port-au-prince.
Delightfully cool in summer.
kente vi To have a straight (sequence of five
cards).
kenz num Fifteen.
kenzèn nan n Fortnight (15 days).
kepi a n Military cap, kepi*.
kèpòpòz attrib Relaxed, tranquil, without worries,
completely at ease.
kerozin nan n Kerosene*.
kès la n 1. Case* (container). 2. Cash-box*,
cash* window, cash* register. Kès depay Savings
fund of a community group. 3. Bass drum.
kesekwann kesedyo And so on, and so forth,
endless litany. From Sp.
keseswa Be it...
kestyon an, kesyon an, keksyon n 1. Question*.
Poze kestyon (or) Mande kestyon To ask a question.
2. Subject, matter.
kestyonnen, kesyonnen, kesyone vt To question*.
kesye a n Cashier*.
kèt 1
interj Wow! Gee whiz! An exclamatory
expression of admiration. Kèt! Gad yon bebe! Se
pa jwèt! Wow! What a beautiful girl! She’s something!
kèt la, lakèt 2
n Collection (in a church). Fè kèt
To take up the collection.
kete vi To take up a collection.
keyi vt To pick, to gather (fruit).
ki 1
rel pron Who, which, that. (Subject relative
pronoun ki may be contracted to k before or
after a vowel sound). M’wè youn ki bèl I see one
that is beautiful. Se ou k’a sove’l It’s you who will
save him.
ki 2
interrog adj What, which. Ki kay ou wè?
Which house do you see?
ki 3
V kiy
kibagay, ki bagay interj What! (Interjection denoting
surprise).
kibò, ki bò adv Where. Kibò ou prale? Where are
you going? Also: kikote.
kichòy indef pron Something. M’ap di ou kichòy e
m’ap ba ou kichòy I’m going to tell you something
and I’m going to give you something.
kidirapou, ki dire pou, kèl dira pou Much less,
let alone. Yo pa gen manje pou tèt yo, ki dire pou
nouri chen They have no food for themselves, let
alone for dogs.
kidnape vt To kidnap*.
93 K
kidonk 1. So, consequently. Kidonk, n’apral Leyogàn,
pa vre? Well, we are going to Leogane, right?
2. That is to say.
kifèlaa, ki fè la a So, consequently.
kifkif Tit for tat.
kijan, ki jan adv How. Kijan ou te fè? How did
you manage? Kijan fè...? Why...? How come...?
Kijan yo rele isi a? What’s the name of this place?
kikinan, ankikinen vt To trouble, to bother.
kikit attrib Elegant, pointed. Talon kikit Extremely
high heels, spiked heels.
kikonk indef pron Anyone, anybody.
kikote, ki kote adv Where. Kikote nou ye la a?
Where are we?
kikseswa, pèkseswa, kikeseswa indef pron Whoever,
noboby, anybody.
kilakèl de, kilakyèl de, dekilakèl interrog adj What,
which. Kilakèl de liv ou te prete’m? What book did
you lend me? (You know you did not lend me any
book!)
kilbitay la n Stumbling, staggering.
kilbite vi To stumble, to tumble, to stagger, to
totter, to be unsteady, to fall over.
kilè, ki lè adv When. Kilè yo vini? When did they
come?
kilès 1. (interrog adj): What, which. Kilès oto ou
pito? Which car do you prefer? 2. (interrog pron):
Who, what, which. Kilès ou vle? Which one do
you want?
kilo a n 1. Kilo*, kilogram*. 2. Carton (of cigarettes).
Yon kilo sigarèt gen dis pòch A carton of
cigarettes has 10 packs.
kilomèt la n Kilometer*.
kilòt la n Woman’s slip, panties. V pantalèt.
kilt la n Worship, cult*.
kilti a, lakilti a, lakiltiv la n 1. Culture*. 2. Crop,
cultivation*. Kilti latè Agriculture.
kiltivatè a n Farmer. Si kiltivatè pa travay, pa gen
manje If the farmer doesn’t work, there’s no more
food.
kiltive vt To cultivate*.
kim nan n Foam, froth. Scum*. Kim savon
Lather, suds. Fè kim To bubble.
kimen, tchimen vi To foam, to lather, to froth,
to make suds. Also: Fè kim. Bouch bèf la kimen
The cow is frothing at the mouth. M’ap lave men’m
avèk savon an, li pa kimen; li pa bon savon I am
washing my hands with soap; there is no foam; the
soap is not good.
kimono a n Kimono*, Japanese dressing gown.
kimoun, ki moun interrog pron Who? Whom?
Kimoun ki di sa? Who said that? Kimoun ou wè?
Whom did you see?
kin 1
attrib Firm, steady.
kin a, kin an 2
Possessive marker used in the
North. Sa a se kin an mwen This one is mine.
kinalaganach adv Firmly, steadfastly, constantly.
kinin nan n Quinine*. Doktè a di’l pran de grenn
kinin chak swa The doctor told him to take two
grains of quinine each evening.
kirye (m), kiryèz (f) attrib Curious*.
kis la n Cyst*.
kisa, ki sa interrog pron What?
Kiskeya n Native Indian name for Haiti and the
Dominican Republic. The Dominicans even today
refer to their country as Quisqueya.
kit 1
attrib 1. Quits, even. Nou kit We are even
(or) We’re quits (debt). 2. Kit pou Even though,
even if (as a result). L’ap manje dyondyon, kit
pou’l malad apre He’s eating mushrooms, even if
he’ll get sick from them.
kit la, tchit la 2
n Common bird of Haiti. Coereba
flaveola.
kit...kit... 3
conj Whether...or. Kit ou ale kit ou
rete, se menm bagay Whether you leave or stay, it
doesn’t matter.
kita M’pap fè yon pa kita, yon pa nago I won’t make
a move; I won’t budge; I am staying right here.
kite 1
vt 1. To leave, to let. Kite moun ki mouri an
pè Leave the dead be (in peace). Kite boul la tonbe
Drop the ball. Kite enpe pou demen Leave some for
tomorrow. 2. To abandon, to forsake. M’kite sa
I give up. Yo kite madanm yo They left their
wives. 3. To allow, to let, to permit. M’kite’l ale
I let him go. vi To call it quits*, to part. Yo te
renmen anpil, men yo kite They loved each other
very much but now they have called it quits.
kite, te 2
v marker Marker (auxiliary) of the
imperative. Kite is sometimes shortened to Te.
Kite’m chante (or) Te’m chante Let me sing.
kitèks la, kitès la n Nail polish. Brand name:
cutex*.
kivèt la n Wash basin, wash hand basin.
kiy la, ki a n 1. Keel (of a ship). 2. Bowling pin,
ninepin.
kiyè V kuiyè
klake vt To snap (one’s fingers).
klaksonn nan n Automobile horn, klaxon*.
klaksonnen vi To blow the car horn, to hoot, to
honk. FARDIN-17: Yo klaksonnen, yo fè pousyè
They blow their horn and raise dust.
klarinèt la n Clarinet*.
K 94
klas la n 1. Classroom, schoolroom. Fini klas
(or) Fin fè klas To finish school (not to drop out
or quit). 2. Class*, sort, type.
klase vt To classify*. Al klase bòdro yo File all the
bills.
klasik attrib Classical*. Mizik klasik Classical
music.
klate V klète
klavye a n Keyboard (piano, typewriter).
kle a n 1. Key. Li pèdi kle vwati’l He lost his car
keys. Remèd sa a se kle This remedy is quite good.
2. Bottle opener. 3. Wrench. 4. A hold. Kle
kou Strangle hold.
klè attrib 1. Light, pale, fair, clear*. Yon ble klè
A light blue. 2. Transparent, sheer. 3. Bright.
Chanm nan klè The room is bright. 4. Obvious.
Se klè It’s obvious. 5. Je’m te klè I was awake.
Rèv je klè Daydreaming.
klèman adv Clearly*.
klere vt 1. To light, to illuminate, to give light
to. Ase klere je’w sou mwen Stop staring at me.
2. To polish something and make it shine (table,
shoes, etc.). vi To shine, to be bright, shiny.
Li gen je klere He has shiny eyes.
kleren an n Liquor distilled from sugar cane
and consumed locally; raw rum.
kleron an n Bugle.
kleronnen vi To shout everywhere.
klèsi vt To clarify*. vi To clear*up. V eklèsi.
klete vt To lock with a key.
klète a, klate a n 1. Light of day. 2. Clarity*,
brightness.
klib la n Club* (group).
klima a n Climate*.
klin attrib Clean*, neat.
klinik la n Clinic*.
klips la n (Paper) clip*.
klipse vt To clip* (papers).
klis la, eklis la n 1. Splinter, fragment. Gen yon
klis anba zong mwen There is a splinter under my
nail. 2. Wicker-work, laths, wooden slats interwoven
to make the walls of a house (usu) covered
with mud.
klisay la n Slats that form the walls of a mud
house
klise vt To cover a panel with wicker-work
klistè V kristè
kliyan an n Customer, client*
kliyantèl la n Clientele*, customers, practice
(lawyers, physician’s).
klòch la n Bell.
klochèt la n small bell. The tiny hand bell of the
houngan, used along with the ason (COUR-
LANDER).
klòk la n Blister.
klorat la n Gunpowder caps.
kloròks la n Bleach. Clorox*.
klostra a n Type of cinder-block.
klòtch la n Clutch*.
kloti a n Enclosure*, barrier, fence.
klotire vt To fence in, to enclose*. Achte filfè,
m’a klotire tè a pou ou Buy some wire, I’ll fence in
the land for you.
klou a 1
n Blister, boil, abscess. Li gen yon gro
klou sou bra’l He has a big blister on his arm.
Mete klou sou abse To add insult to injury; to make
matters worse. Se klou sou maklouklou That’s
adding insult to injury.
klou a 2
n 1. Nail, tack. Klou gagit, klou bòkèt
Types of nails. 2. Klou jiròf Clove.
kloun nan n Clown*.
kloure vt To nail (down), to pin down. Soulye
kloure Shoes which are nailed (tacked) rather than
sewn.
klwazon an n Partition, interior wall.
kò a 1
n 1. Body. Wete kò’w (or) Rale kò’w Get
out of here. Li kenbe kò’l mal He has a bad
posture. Fann nan kò yon moun To go after s.o.
with a vengeance. Nèg sa a gen kò lage (or) kò
kraz This man is listless, indolent, slow, apathetic.
2. Corpse, body. 3. Self (kò refers to the physical
self. It is used to form reflexive verbs). Kò’m
Myself: Men li kache kò’l But he hid himself. Souke
kò’w Get a move on. Kò’m pa bon I feel sick. Pa
bat kò’w Don’t worry. Pou kò’m, pou kò’l, etc. By
myself, by himself, etc., alone. 4. Kò kay Household,
inside of a house. Ou mete moun nan lan kò kay ou
epi li trayi’w You take s.o. into your household and
he betrays you.
kò a 2
n Corn* (excrescence or induration of
parts of the skin on the feet), callus.
kòb la n 1. Cent, old copper* penny (From Sp.
cobre). 2. Money. Nonm sa a gen anpil kòb
This man is very rich.
kobannza attrib Thin, emaciated, feeble.
kòbèy la n Basket. Yon kòbèy flè A basket of
flowers.
kòbiya a n Hearse.
kòbòy la n Cowboy*.
kòche 1
vt To scratch, to scrape, causing a small
injury to the skin.
kòche a 2
n Scratch (wound).
95 K
kòchèt la n A low blow, a foul, a hook in
boxing. Same origin as E. crochet*. Tout jwèt se
jwèt, kòchèt pa ladan’l No foul play, please.
kochi, krochi 1
vt To bend.
kochi, krochi 2
attrib 1. Bent, curved, crooked.
Zepeng nan krochi The pin is bent. 2. (adv) Ou te
tande krochi You misunderstood. Pale krochi To
say things one should not (for instance about
people in power).
kochma a, krochma a n Nightmare.
kochon an n 1. Pig, hog. Kochon maron Boar.
Manman kochon Sow. La kochon Lard. Pak
kochon Pig-sty, pig pen. Vyann kochon Pork. 2. A
dirty person. 3. (fig) Pyon an kochon The pawn
is blocked (in games).
kochondenn nan, kochon denn nan n Guinea
pig.
kòd la n 1. Old measure for wood. 2. Rope,
cord*, string. Sote kòd To jump rope. Pa rale’m
sou kòd Don’t try to get to me by indirect means.
Kase kòd To kick the bucket, to die. Nan pwen
fanm manje kòd konsa This woman will go to bed
with any man. Ou anba kòd You have been had;
you are done for. Kòd lonbrit Umbilical cord*.
kodak la n Camera, kodak*.
kodake V kodase
kodase, kadache, kodake vi To cackle (while
getting ready to set and lay eggs). Poul la ap
kadache The hen is cackling.
kòde vt To twist, to braid. vi To writhe (in
pain, for instance), to bend.
kodenn nan, kodèn nan n Turkey, gobbler.
kòdòk Mango kòdòk Type of mango.
kòdon an n Girdle (ecclesiastic). Kòdon lonbrit
Umbilical cord*.
kòdonèt la n Type of hairdo (corn rows).
kòdonye a, kòdonnye a n Shoemaker, cobbler.
Bòs kòdonye Shoemaker.
kòdyòm attrib Correct, OK, good.
kòf la n 1. Iron box, hull. 2. Trunk (of a car).
3. Trunkfish. 4. Kòf lestomak, kòtòf lestomak Tho-
rax.
kofray la n Wooden form in which cement is
poured (construction).
kofre vt 1. To exert very strong pressure on
s.o.’s chest; to crush s.o. causing an indentation.
kòfrefò a n Safe. V kòf.
kòhòt la n Group of people who congregate in
religious processions.
kòk la 1
n 1. Rooster. Kon kòk chante When the
cock crows, i.e. early in the morning. Kòk san bèk
Person with missing teeth, gap-toothed person Cf.
mazora. Se pa kaka kòk That’s no chicken shit.
Se sèl kòk ki chante He is king of the barnyard.
Kòk batay Game cock. Bon kòk Macho. Kòk
savann Good-for-nothing. 2. Penis, cock*.
kòk2
V kokoye
kokad la n Bow (used to tie the hair on a child’s
head).
kòkakòk n Children’s game played with sand.
kokakola a, koka a n Coca cola*, coke*.
kòkay la n House, household.
kokayin nan n Cocaine*.
koke, kroke vt 1. To hang (up). Li tap monte
sèvolan’l, sèvolan an koke He was flying his kite
high; it got hung (in a tree). 2. To embrace, to
hug. 3. To screw, to fuck (North of Haiti).
koken an n Swindler, crook, cheat, a sly one,
scoundrel.
kokenn attrib Huge, very big. Kokenn chenn
Huge, gigantic. Kokenn gason Strong man. Yon
kokenn chenn pyebwa An extremely large tree.
kokèt la, krokèt la n Croquette* (mixture of
breadfruit and other ingredients, cod, etc.)
koki a n Shell, conch, sea shell.
koklich la n Whooping-cough.
kòkmò a n Grave-digger and cemetery attendant.
koko a n Genitals (fem). Cunt (vulg). Koko tèt
Head.
kòkòb attrib Clumsy.
kokobe vt To cripple. Crippled, handicapped,
maimed. n Cripple. Kokobe revòlte This time,
he or she revolted (and is not going to take it
anymore).
kòkòday la, akòday la n Friendship, camaraderie,
close relationship.
kokodjaka a n Junk belongings.
kokolo attrib Tèt kokolo Bald.
kokomakak la n Club, cudgel. Also called Bwa
makak Monkey palm. Geonoma oxycarpa Mart.
kokonèt la, konkonnèt la n Coconut* cookie.
(Type of cake the principal ingredient of which
is grated coconut).
kokonm nan, konkonm nan n 1. Native cucumber*,
Cucumis sativus L. 2. A bump on the
head caused by a blow.
kokonm zonbi a n Non edible vegetable a variety
of which is used medicinally for asthma. It is
knotty and whitish. Datura stramonium L.
kokorat la n Insect found by the sea and used as
bait by children.
K 96
kòkòt la n 1. Genitals (female). 2. Darling,
sweetheart. Kòkòt ak Figaro Inseparable friends.
Kòkòt, kote ou ye? Darling, where are you?
kòkòtò attrib 1. Stingy. 2. Nonchalant, lifeless.
kokoye a, kòk la n 1. Coconut*. Pye kokoye
Coconut tree. BEAUBRUN/A-10: Eske ou te keyi
kokoye yo? Did you pick the coconuts? 2. A folkloric
dance.
kòkpye attrib Said of a man who gets nowhere
with women, although he may try hard.
kòkraz attrib Laziness, nonchalance, apathy, fatigue,
tiredness.
kòksavann, kòk savann attrib Good-for-nothing.
kòksis la n Coccys* (anat). Coccygeal bone.
kòktèl la n Cocktail*.
kòl la 1
n 1. Collar*. 2. Necktie. V Kravat.
kòl 2
V lakòl
kola a n 1. Cola*, soft drink. 2. Type of delicious
fish.
kolangèt, koulangèt interj Jesus Christ! Oh my!
V langèt.
kolboso V kalbose
kole 1
vt 1. To paste, to glue. 2. To connect, to
put next to. Kole ak Next to, against. Chanm li
kole ak pa’m His room is next to mine. Kuis kole
With thighs close together. 3. To get s.o. stuck
(without an answer or the means to go on).
kole a 2
n Collar (of shirts, etc.).
kòlè a, kolè a n Anger, rage, wrath, fury. An kòlè
Angry. Pa koute kòlè’w Don’t get upset. Pa fè
kòlè konsa Don’t get so terribly angry.
kòlèg la n Colleague*.
kolèj la n Secondary school. Cf. E. college*.
koleksyon an n Collection* (stamps, coins, but
not church collection). Fè koleksyon To collect
(stamps, etc.).
kolerin nan, kolorin nan n Cholerine* (disease
characterized by diarrhea, vomiting, cramps and
presence of blood in the stools).
kòlèt la 1
n Burlap (Type of material with which
sacks are made).
kòlèt la 2
n Collar*. Kenbe (pran) yon moun nan
kòlèt To grab someone by the collar. Gran kòlèt=gro
zouzoun=gran chabrak=gro zotobre Big shot.
kòlfòt la n Epoxy.
kolibèt la n M’pa nan kolibèt ak ou Keep your
distance; don’t get too familiar.
kolibri a, kolobri a n Colibri* (tiny bird).
kolik la n 1. Ache in the stomach. Colic*, a
paroxysmal pain in the abdomen or bowels.
2. Menstruation. Cf E. menstrual colic. V règ.
kolizyon an n Collision*. Fè kolizyon To collide*;
to run into each other.
kolkrèm nan n Cold-cream*.
kòlmann nan n Type of lamp (Coleman*: a
trade name).
kolokent la n A person who sucks money from
others. This word is often applied to prostitutes
and stingy people.
kolomi V ekonomi
Kolon n Columbus*.
kolonèl la, kolo a n Colonel*.
koloni an, lakoloni n Colony*. Depi nan tan
lakoloni Since colonial times.
kolonn nan, kolòn nan n Column*; squad. Yon
kolonn A great number of, a bunch of (things), a
band of (persons). Yon kolonn moun A lot of
people. Senkyèm kolòn Fifth column.
kolonn vètebral la n Spine, backbone, spinal
column*.
kòlòròch la n Tiny edible mollusk that clings to
rocks by the seaside. Tèt kòlòròch Hard head.
kòlòs la n Colossus*. Yon kòlòs gason A huge
man.
kòlta a n Coal tar*.
kòlte vt To button up. Li byen kòlte He is well
covered around the neck. Yon rad kòlte A dress
with a high neckline.
kolye a n 1. Necklace. 2. Collar* (e.g. dog
collar).
kòm conj As, whereas, since. Kòm li gen lajan, li
vwayaje anpil Since he has a lot of money, he
travels extensively. Kòm si, konmsi As if, as
though. Fè kòm si ou dakò Pretend you have
agreed. Kòm ki dire, kòmkidire As if. Kòm il fo,
kòmilfo OK, correct. Kòm nou dizon As we
agreed; as agreed.
kòm prep As.
koma a, konma a 1
n Top hat used for formal
wear by the higher echelon.
koma 2
V akoma
komabo, koumabo interj Exclamation showing
surprise, astonishment, amazement. Komabo!
Gade tigason an antre epi li pa di bonjou Golly!
Look at that boy. He comes in and doesn’t even say
Good morning.
kòman, kouman interrog adv How. Kouman ou
ye? How are you? Kouman fè... How come...
Also: kijan fè...
kòmandan an, konmandan an n Commander*.
97 K
kòmande, koumande, konmande vt 1. To command*,
to give orders (to), to order. 2. To
place an order (for).
kòmandè a n 1. Commander*. 2. Bossy person.
L’ap pran pòz kòmandè’l What a bossy person!
kòmann nan n 1. Command*, order. 2. Order
(for merchandise). Plase yon kòmann To place
an order.
kòmannman an n Commandment*.
kòmanse, koumanse, konmanse vt To begin, to
start, to commence*. Kòmanse yon devwa To
start a homework. vi To begin, to start, to commence*.
Kous la pral kòmanse The race is going
to begin.
kòmansman an, koumansman an n Beginning,
start, commencement*.
kòmantè a n Commentary*, comment*.
komapiston interj Golly! (Exclamation denoting
surprise, astonishment). Also: koumabo.
kòmè a, konmè a, makòmè, makonmè n 1. A
godmother is the ‘kòmè’ or ‘komè’ of the godfather
and of the parents of the godchild. 2. Maid
of honor. 3. Young woman (mostly pej). Fè
yon ti bèl ak ti konmè a To do something nice for
the girl. Gason makòmè A sissy.
komedi a, konmedi a, lakomedi n Comedy*. Se
te yon komedi It was nothing serious. Pope lakomedi
Puppet.
komedyen an n 1. Comedian*. 2. Also a person
who pretends, puts on, and who is insincere.
kòmèltèk interj Wow! (Exclamation expressing
surprise).
komès la, konmès la n Trade, commerce*. Fè
konmès To do business, to have a store.
komèsan an, konmèsan n Trader, dealer, mer-
chant*.
komèt la, lakomèt n Comet*.
komèt, konmèt vt To commit*. Komèt yon fot
To make an error. Also: Fè yon fot.
komi an, konmi an n Sales person, vendor in a
store, clerk, sales clerk.
komik attrib Funny, comic*.
kòmilfo attrib Correct, decent, appropriate, excellent,
comme il faut*.
komin nan n Commune* (county).
kominal V majistra
kominikasyon an, konminikasyon an n Communication*.
Pafwa li pa fasil pou gen kominikasyon
nan telefòn Sometimes it is not easy to communicate
on the telephone.
kominike a, konminike a 1
n Communiqué*.
kominike, konminike 2
vi To communicate* (ak:
with), to contact. M’pa kominike ak Lwi depi twa
semèn I haven’t talked with Louis for three weeks.
kominis la n Communist*.
kominote a, konminote a n Community*.
kominyen, kominye vi To receive communion*,
to commune*.
komisè a, konmisè a n Also: Komisè gouvènman.
(An officer appointed by the government as its
representative in the court system of every major
town).
komisyon an, konmisyon an n 1. Errand; message.
Voye komisyon To send a message. 2. Commission*
(remuneration). 3. Committee. 4. Genitals.
Natura muliebris (koko).
komisyonè a, konmisyonè a n Messenger. Cf. E.
Commissionnaire*.
komite a, konmite a n Committee*, council.
kòmkidire, kòmsidire As if to say, that is.
kòmkwa conj As if to say. Kòmkwa se pa li As if
to say it’s not he.
komòd la, konmòd la n Toilet, water closet,
W.C. Komòd la santi The toilet stinks. Today this
term has been mostly superceded by watè, latrin.
kòmsadwatèt As it should be, properly, correctly,
comme il faut.
kon 1
conj When, as, as soon as. Kon’l rive As
soon as he comes. V kou.
kon 2
prep As, like. Li kon papa’l He is like his
father. V kou.
kòn nan n Horn. Troke kòn To fight. Kòn soulye
Shoe-horn. Kòn lanbi Conch shell. Kòn zo Cups
in which one shakes dice before playing. Li pran
kòn nan pou li He has been talking a long time. He
has monopolized the time.
konba a n Struggle, combat*. V batay.
konbat vt To fight, to combat*.
konbe V konbyen
konbèlann nan n Trick(ery) designed to defraud
a power company of electric current; fraud,
scheme by which one uses a thin rubber hose to
siphon gasoline out of a tank. (Cumberland*,
the name of an American who used to work in
Haiti for the power company).
konbinen vt To combine*.
konbinezon an, konminezon an n 1. Combination*.
2. Combine*, plot, scheming.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-26: Se ou’k pou konnen
pou ou konprann... si se konbinezon You are the
one who should know if it’s a question of a secret
plan.
konbit V koumbit
K 98
konble vt 1. To fill up, to heap up. 2. To
surround, to press close. Konble yon moun To
crowd someone. DEJEAN-55: Pèp la tep konble Jezi
pou li koute paròl Bondye a The people were crowding
around Jesus to hear the word of God.
konbyen, konben, konbe adv How much? How
many? Konben liv nou ganyen? How many books
do we have? Di’m konbyen ou achte kay la? Tell
me how much you paid for the house?
kondanasyon an n 1. The (legal) sentence. Kondanasyon
a mò Death sentence. 2. (fig) The cause
of your misfortune. Sa ou fè la a se kondanasyon
ou Your last move did you in; that’s what got you.
kondane, kondanne vt To condemn*, to convict.
kondanse vt To condense*. Lèt kondanse Condensed
milk.
kondi V kondui
kondisip la n Fellow-student.
kondisyon an n 1. Condition*. Ki kondisyon yo?
What are the conditions? A kondisyon... On condition
that.... 2. State, status. Lan ki kondisyon machandiz
la rive? In what condition did the merchandise
arrive?
kondui, kondwi, kondi vt 1. To drive (a car).
2. To lead, to guide, to direct, to accompany.
Li te kondui maryaj mwen He was the best man at
my wedding. vpr To behave. Li kondui’l byen He
behaves himself.
konduit la n Conduct*, behavior, deportment.
Movèz konduit Misconduct*.
kònè a n Corner* kick (at a game of soccer).
koneksyon an n Connection*.
konekte vt To connect*, to plug.
kònen vi To tingle, to wheeze, to buzz; to fuzz.
To blow a horn (or other instruments sounding
like it). Bato a ap kònen The ship’s horn is
blowing. Gen yon moun k’ap pale’m mal; zòrèy
mwen ap kònen Someone has been saying bad things
about me; my ears are burning (tingling).
konesans la, konnesans la n 1. Knowledge, knowhow,
understanding. 2. Consciousness. Pèdi
konesans To faint, to pass out, to lose consciousness,
to become unconscious. Reprann konesans To come
to, to regain consciousness, to become conscious. San
konesans Unconscious. 3. Acquaintance. Fè konesans
avèk To make acquaintance with.
konesè a n A knowledgeable person, connaisseur*.
kònèt la, kònè a n 1. Receiver (telephone).
2. Cone Yon kònèt krèm An ice cream cone. 3. Paper
cup.
konferans la n Lecture (formal speech). Cf. E.
conference*.
konfese vi To confess*. vt To confess* (sins).
konfesyon an n Confession*. Bay yon moun
absolisyon san konfesyon To be fooled into thinking
that a person is an angel because of his or her
demeanor.
konfi a n Mixture of vinegar, hot pepper, and
vegetables used for seasoning after cooking. Also:
piman konfi. Cf. pikliz.
konfidans la n Confidence*. Li fè’m konfidans
He confided in me. He told me his secrets.
konfimasyon an n Confirmation* (religious).
konfimen vt To confirm* (religious).
konfiske vt To confiscate*.
konfiti a n Marmelade, jam, preserve.
konfizyon an n Confusion*.
konfò a n 1. Comfort*, luxury. M’renmen konfò’m
I love my confort. 2. Latrine, toilet, comfort* station.
V komòd.
konfòme vpr To conform*. Li konfòme’l He got
in line; he complied.
konfonn vt To confuse, to confound*.
konfyans la, lakonfyans n Confidence*, trust.
M’gen konfyans nan yo I trust them.
konfye vt To entrust.
konfyolo a n Scheme, plot.
kong nan n Conger*, conger-eel*. A leptocephalous
fish. Li move kon kong Boy! He is angry!
kongo a n 1. Congo*. 2. Dance rhythm. 3. Pwa
kongo Congo pea(s). Cajanus indicus. 4. Abiye
tankou kongo belizè To be dressed in a grotesque,
ugly fashion.
kònichon an, konnichon an n 1. Gherkin. 2. Cigarette
lighter.
konje a n Leave, vacation, day off, congee*. An
konje On vacation.
konjesyon an n Congestion*. Konjesyon serebral
Congestion of the brain, stroke.
konjige vt To conjugate*.
konkirans la n Competition. L’ap fè’m konki-rans
He is trying to equal, beat, compete with, surpass
me. He is trying to match whatever I do.
konkou a n Assistance, help, aid.
konm nan n Roof, peak.
konma V koma
konmanman, kòmanman interj Jesus-Christ! Oh
my!
konmanse V kòmanse
konmè V kòmè
konminike V kominike
99 K
konn 1
impers v It sometimes happens that. The
verb ‘konn’ usually precedes the impersonal verb
‘gen’ (there is, there are). Konn gen lagrèl lan
Kenskòf Sometimes there is hail in Kensfòf.
konn 2
aux v To be in the habit of. Li te konn
vini chak dimanch He used to come every Sunday.
konn3
V konnen
konnen, konn vt 1. To know. At the end of a
sentence or before a personal pronoun, do not
use ‘konn’, use ‘konnen’. Nou konnen yo We
know them. Jis mwen pa konnen To the limit; very
much. Yo gra jis yo pa konnen They are very, very
fat. 2. To know how. M’konn jwe jwèt sa a I
know how to play that game.
kònòsò a n Connaisseur*.
konpa a n 1. Compass* (instrument). Li pèdi
konpa’l He lost his way around; he is disoriented.
Mete yon moun sou konpa’l To put s.o. on the right
track; to make s.o. come to his senses. 2. Musical
beat, dance rhythm. Konpa dirèk Type of Haitian
dance rhythm.
konpare vt To compare*.
konparèt 1
vi To appear*, to make an appearance
in court. Konparèt devan jij la To appear before
the judge.
konparèt la 2
n A variety of cake very popular in
the city of Jérémie.
konparezon an n Comparison*.
konpayèl la n Companion*, co-worker, friend,
pal.
konpayi an, konpanyi an n Company*. Mesye
dam lakonpayi Ladies and gentlemen.
konpayon an, konpay la n Companion*.
konpè a, monkonpè n 1. One’s son’s or daughter’s
godfather. 2. The godmother of a child will call
the godfather ‘monkonpè’. 3. Friend, pal. Bròdè
kon konpè kòk Elegant (cocky) as Mr. Cock.
konpetan attrib Competent*, capable.
konpetans la n Competence*. Ou dwe kenbe
konpetans la You must be up to it; you must be able
to meet the requirements.
konplè a n Suit (of clothes).
konplete vt To complete*. Men moso lan lajan
an; ou va konplete’l Here is part of the money; you
will add the rest.
konplikasyon an n Complication*. Gen tròp
konplikasyon; m’kite sa There are too many complications;
I give up.
konplike vt To complicate*. Sitiyasyon an trè
konplike The situation is very complicated.
konpliman an n Congratulation, praise, compliment*.
Fè konpliman To congratulate, to praise,
to exalt.
konplis la n Accomplice*.
konplo a n Plot*, conspiration.
konplotay la, konplotaj la n Plot*, conspiracy.
Ou nan konplotay You’re mixed up in a plot.
konplote vi To plot*, to conspire.
konpòte vpr To behave, to demean one’s self.
Se pou ou konpòte ou byen You must behave. Ou pa
dwe konpòte ou mal Don’t misbehave.
konpòtman an n Behavior.
konpoze vt 1. To make, to write, to compose*.
Li konpoze bèl mizik He writes beautiful music.
2. To mix (drugs, drinks). Dlo konpoze A mixture
of water, herbs and leaves used for medicinal purposes
(popular). Kleren konpoze White raw rhum mixed
with other ingredients. vi To take an exam.
M’pral konpoze maten an I am going to take an
exam this morning.
konpozisyon an n 1. School examination. 2. Mixture
(of drinks). 3. Composition*.
konprann 1
vt To grasp, to make out, to understand,
to comprehend*. Mal konprann To misunderstand.
vi To believe, to think. M’te konprann
ke... I thought that... Li konprann mwen te retounen
He thought I had come back.
konprann 2
n Understanding. Fi a san konprann
That woman doesn’t know any better.
konprès la n Compress*.
konpromèt vt To compromise*.
konpromi an n Compromise*.
konsa adv 1. So, such, like that, thus, in this way,
in that manner; just like that. Se toujou konsa
It’s always like that. 2. Circa, about, roughly. Li
gen sèz an konsa She’s about sixteen. Sometimes,
it’s not translated. Yo di’m konsa al fè rout mwen
They told me to leave.
konsanti vi To consent*, to accept, to assent.
konsantman an, konsantiman an n Accord, agreement,
consent*.
konsantre vt To concentrate*. vi To concentrate*.
Konsantre sou sa w’ap fè Concentrate on what
you’re doing.
konsè a n Concert*.
konsekan attrib 1. Important, consequential*.
2. Logical.
konsekans la n Consequence*; importance. San
konsekans Inconsequential*.
konsène, konsènen vt To concern*.
konsesyon an n Concession*.
konsèv la n Preserves.
konsève vt To store, to preserve, to conserve*.
Konsève fòs ou Conserve your strength.
K 100
konsevwa vt To conceive*.
konsèy la n Advice, counsel*. Pa ban’m konsèy
Don’t give me any advice.
konseye 1
vt To advise.
konseye a 2
n Counselor*, adviser.
konsiderasyon an n Consideration*.
konsidere vt To consider*, to regard.
konsil la n Consul*, consular* officer.
konsila a n Consulate*.
konsiltation an n Consultation*.
konsilte vt 1. To consult* (a lawyer). 2. To
examine (a patient).
konsiyen vt 1. To consign* (merchandise). 2. To
forbid access to, to close. Andre pat vle resevwa
moun; li konsiyen pòt li Andrew didn’t want to see
anyone; he closed the door to everybody. 3. To confine.
Lyetnan an te konsiyen pandan de semèn The lieutenant
was confined for two weeks.
konsolasyon an n Consolation*, confort.
konsole vt To console*. Pitit li mouri, y’ap
konsole’l His child died; they’re consoling him.
Madanm ou kite’w; konsole’w Your wife left you;
console yourself.
konsòn nan n Consonant.
konsonmen 1
vt To eat (in a restaurant). Li fin
konsonmen He is through eating.
konsonmen an, konsome a 2
n Soup, consomme*,
bouillon, broth.
konspirasyon an n Plot, conspiracy*.
konspire vi To plot, to conspire*.
konsta a n On the spot check. Lapolis vin fè
konsta The police came to make a report.
konstatasyon an n Observation.
konstate vi To notice, to observe, to ascertain.
M’konstate li pa vini I noticed that he did not come.
konstipasyon an n Constipation*.
konstipe attrib Constipated*.
konstitisyon an n Constitution*.
konstriksyon an n Construction*.
konstrui, konstri vt To build, to construct*.
konsyans la n Conscience*; knowledge. M’pat
gen konsyans m’te fè sa I didn’t realize I had done
that.
konsyansye attrib Conscientious*.
kont 1
prep Against. M’pa gen anyen kont li I have
nothing against him. M’kont sa I object to that; I
am opposed to that.
kont 2
adv Plenty (of), enough. Nonm sa a gen
kont lajan This man has plenty of money. Li manje
kont kò’l (or) Li manje jis kont li He ate enough
(plenty). Yon sèl se kont One is enough.
kont la 3
n 1. Tale, story, fairy tale. 2. Riddle,
enigma. Tire kont To tell tales and riddles.
kont la 4
n Dispute, quarrel, feud. Chèche kont
To instigate a quarrel; to look for trouble. Nou gen
kont We are quarreling.
kont la 5
n Account*. Rann kont To account for.
Fè yon kont mal taye To make a settlement (Type
of rough and ready compromise made when
circumstances are not propitious). M’sou kont
ou I rely on you; I am your responsibility; I am in
your hands. Ou ap fè manti sou kont mwen You
are telling lies about me. Pou kont li Alone; by
himself.
kontab la n Accountant*.
kontabilite a n Accounting*.
kontak la n Contact*. Pran kontak avèk To get in
touch with.
kontakte vt To contact*.
kontamine vt To contaminate*.
kontan attrib Pleased, happy, glad, contented*,
cheerful. Li pat kontan He was unhappy.
kontanple vt To contemplate*, to behold.
kontante vpr To be satisfied, contented (de with).
Kontante ou de sa Be happy with that; don’t ask for
more.
kontantman an n Joy, contentment*, happiness.
Kontantman fè’l pa kapab dòmi Happiness keeps
him from sleeping.
konte vt To count*, to figure out, to reckon.
Konte ze To count eggs. vi To be of consequence.
Lajan sèlman ki konte pou sèten moun To some
people the only thing that counts is money. 2. Konte
sou To count on, to depend upon, to rely on, to
trust.
kontè a n Meter (electric).
kontgout la n Dropper.
kontinue, kontinye, kontinwe vt To continue*.
Kontinue travay la Continue the work. vi To go
on, to get on, to continue*.
kontra a n Contract*. Pase kontra; siyen kontra
To enter into an agreement; to sign a contract.
Travay sou kontra To work under contract (not as
a regular employee).
kontradiksyon an n Contradiction*.
kontraryan attrib Annoying, objecting. Nan-pwen
moun kontraryan pase’l Nobody objects more than he
does. He’s a pain in the...neck.
101 K
kontrarye vt 1. To hinder, to prevent. Lapli a
kontrarye jwèt la The rain prevented the game.
2. To upset, to put s.o. in a bad mood.
kontraryete a, kontraryezon an n Hindrance,
problem, nuisance, disappointment. M’tapral
nan sinema; m’vin gen yon kontraryete. M’pa ale
ankò I was going to the movies, but a problem arose.
So I didn’t go. An zing de kontraryete Moody, in a
bad mood.
kontravansyon an n Traffic ticket.
kontre, rankontre vt To meet, to encounter*, to
find. Kibò m’kontre’w yè? Where did I meet you
yesterday? Se byen jwenn byen kontre Both foes are
ready for each other (or) I’m ready for you.
kontrè V okontrè
kontrebann nan n Contraband*, smuggling. Fè
kontrebann To smuggle.
kontredi vt To contradict*.
kontremèt la n Foreman, contractor.
kontribisyon an n Tax office. Also: biro kontri-
bisyon.
kontròl la n 1. Control*, supervision. 2. Verification,
check.
kontrole vt To check, to examine, to control*,
to verify, to oversee.
kontrolè a n 1. Controller*, supervisor, inspector.
2. Argumentative person, busibody, meddler. Ou
trò kontrolè It’s none of your business.
kontwa a n Counter*.
konvenk vt To convince*.
konvenki attrib Convinced*. Li pat konvenki He
was not convinced.
konvèsasyon an n Conversation*.
konvèti vt To convert*.
konviksyon an n Belief; the act of being convinced.
konvnab attrib Acceptable, suitable, convenient*.
konvnans la n Decency. Li san konvnans He has
no manners.
konvni vi 1. To suit, to fit. 2. To be convenient*.
konvoke vt To summon (legally).
konwè, kouwè, kon wè, kou wè conj As, as...as.
Fi a bèl konwè lakansyèl That woman is as beautiful
as a rainbow.
konyapis la n Master cocksman. (Also applied
to women).
konyen vi To have sexual intercourse. vt To
fuck (to screw). Also: raze, koupe, pran, plimen,
taye. In the North: kroke.
kopi a n Copy*, duplicata.
kopye vt To copy*. Kopye sou To copy from.
koralen an n Small boat used near coral reafs.
Native canoe used by fishermen along the Haitian
coast.
koray la n Coral*.
kore vt 1. To steady, to tie, to fasten (so something
won’t fall), to hold in place, to wedge, to stop a
wheel with an object, to prop, to strengthen.
2. To stuff (with food). Mwen byen kore I have
fortified myself by eating a good meal.
kòrèk attrib Correct*, proper, ‘comme il faut’,
good and proper, appropriate. Profesè a di devwa
ou pa kòrèk The teacher said your homework was
not correct. Tifi a kòrèk That girl is O. K. Pa
kòrèk Incorrect. 2. (adv) Correctly*, properly.
Fè afè’w kòrèk Act properly.
koreksyon an n Correction*.
kòrèkteman adv Correctly*, properly, comme il
faut.
koresponn vi 1. To correspond*. 2. Koresponn
avèk To answer to s.o. for. Si ou fè sa, se avè’m
w’a koresponn If you do that, you’ll have to answer
to me for it (you will have to face me).
koridò a n Passage, aisle, hall, hallway, corridor*.
Li gen lespri koridò He has a one-track mind,
usually on sex.
korije vt 1. To correct*. 2. To punish, to repri-
mand.
kòripsyon an n Corruption*.
kòronp vt To corrupt*, to deprave.
kòronpi attrib Corrupt*. Dlo kòronpi Stagnant,
filthy, foul water.
kòròsòl la n Soursop. Annona muricata L.
kòryas attrib Old and tough, hard. Vyann nan
rete trò lontan sou dife; li vin kòryas The meat was
cooked too much; it became tough. Cf. E. coriaceous*
(of or like leather).
kòs V ekòs
kòsaj la, kòsay la n Upper part of a dress,
separate from the skirt, blouse, corsage* (bust).
Kòsaj li te bèl Her blouse was beautiful. (fig) Pòl
ap chèche antre nan kòsaj mwen Paul is trying to
play up to me (or) to get on my good side. Wete nan
kòsay To get rid of (an undesirable person, a former
friend or associate).
kòse a, kòsè a n Corset*.
kostim nan n Suit (of clothes). Kostim sa a tròp
pou mwen (or) Kostim sa a vale’m This suit is
too big for me.
kostimdeben an, kostim de ben an n Bathing
suit, swimsuit.
kostime attrib To wear a suit. Msye te byen
kostime He had a nice suit on. Cf. E. costume*.
K 102
kòt la 1
n 1. Rib. 2. Draw-sheet. (usu) ‘kòt
kabann’. 3. Rag, kotex. 4. Kòt fanmi The entire
family with all its members.
kòt la, lakòt 2
n Coast*. Moun lakòt People from
the coast as opposed to ‘moun mòn’ (peasants in
general), and moun Pòtoprens (inhabitants of the
capital). Fi a te fè lakòt That woman used to make
the rounds.
kòtakòt, kòt a kòt attrib Side by side.
kote 1
adv 1. Where. M’a chita kote m’vle I will
sit down where I want. Kote m’kale’l se lan naje
Swimming is the one thing I do better than he does.
M’pa konnen kote yo ye I don’t know where they
are. 2. Where? (Other variants are: ki kote? bò
ki kote?) Kote ou prale? Where are you going? Ki
kote li soti? Where does he come from?
kote 2
rel pron Where, in which, from which.
Kay kote li tap viv la The house where he was
living.
kote a 3
n 1. Side. Pa dòmi sou kote ou gen blesi a
Do not sleep on the side where the wound is. 2. Place;
room, space. Nan pwen kote isi a pou mete lòt liv
There is no room here for you to put more books.
3. Venue. Y’ap chèche yon kote pou fè reyinyon an
They are looking for a venue to convene the meeting.
Yon kote A place, somewhere. Yon lòt kote Somewhere
else. Okenn kote Nowhere.
kote, kot 4
prep Beside, near, next to; in comparison
to. M’al chita kote’l I went to sit down next to
him. The forms ‘bò kote’ and ‘bò kot’ are also
used. ‘A kote’ and ‘sou kote’ mean ‘next to’, ‘at
the side of’. Ou pa anyen kot (bò kot) nonm sa a
In comparison to this man, you are nothing. M’pral
kot Pòl I am going to see Paul, to talk to him.
kòtfè a n Cliff by the shore.
kotizasyon an n Collection (of money), share,
contribution. Bay kotizasyon To contribute, to
make a subscription.
kòtòf Kòtòf lestomak. V kòf.
koton an n Cotton*. Cheve koton Nappy hair.
kou a 1
n 1. Blow, stroke, hit (V kout). Bay kou
To beat, to hit. 2. Time. Kou sa a This time.
kou a 2
n Course*, class. M’gen yon kou anglè a
midi I have an English class at noon.
kou a 3
n Neck. Nwa kou Nape of the neck. Kou
yon boutèy Neck of a bottle. Kou rèd 1. Stiff neck.
2. Stingy, avaricious.
kou, kon 4
prep Like, as. Li naje kou pwason He
swims like a fish.
kou, kon 5
conj 1. As. Piti kou’l piti Small as he
may be. 2. When, as soon as. Kou’l midi As soon
as it’s noon. 3. As well as. Fanm kou gason
Women as well as men.
koub la n Curve*. Kase koub To make a curve.
koubaba, koubabi, kobèbè interj Jesus-Christ!
Oh my!
koubati a n Pain in the back, lumbago.
koube vt To bend. vi To bend (one’s self), to
bow, to curve. (fig) To give way, to bend over.
koubouyon an n Type of fish soup.
kouch la n 1. Layer. 2. Childbirth, (syn) “akouchman”.
3. Baker’s plank. Pen ou sou kouch,
lanmori ou sou gri You have no worries, you are a
lucky person.
kouchadò a n Sleepyhead.
kouche vi 1. To lie down. 2. To go to bed.
Kouche deyò To sleep out. 3. To set (sun).
kouchèt la n 1. Diaper. 2. Bunkbed (on a ship,
etc).
kouchkouch la n Couscous*. (Made with a special
flour from the root of dry manioc).
koud 1
vt To sew.
koud la 2
n Elbow.
koudam nan n Shot, gunshot.
koudèy la n Glimpse, glance.
koudyay la, koudjay la n 1. Animated public
dancing, cavorting, feasting, revelry, sometimes
during political rallies. 2. The name of a dance.
It signifies ‘fast’ or ‘agitated’ (COURLANDER).
koujin V kuizin
koukou a n Owl, cuckoo*. Lèd kou koukou Ugly
as a cuckoo.
koukouman V akoukouman
koukoun nan n Cunt, pussy, natura muliebris.
koukourouj, koukourouy Fè koukourouj : Expression
used in the game of ‘hide and seek’ (lago
kache) meaning that everyone playing will go
and try to find the person(s) in hiding, when
the person who was ‘it’ (bouche) was unable to
find him (them). Fè koukourouj dèyè yon moun
To go all out after s.o.
koukout Darling. Also: cheri koukout.
koukouy la n Firefly, firebug. Chak koukouy klere
pou je’l Each man for himself.
koulan attrib 1. Flexible, agreeable (person).
2. Ne koulan Slipknot, running knot.
koulangèt, koulanbwèt, koulègèt interj Oh God!
Oh my! (Exclamation denoting surprise). Koulangèt
manman’w! (or) Langèt manman’w! Mother
fucker!
koulant la n Stinkweed. Eryngium foetidum L.
koule vt 1. To sink (a boat). Soumaren an koule
twa bato The sub sank three boats. 2. To filter
(coffee). 3. Koule beton To pour cement. vi To
flow (blood, river); to be leaky (container); to
103 K
trickle, to drain (water); to duck, to go to the
ground. Se koule a ki sove’l It’s the fact that he
ducked that saved him. To sink, to go down
(boat); to flunk an exam. Li koule nan konpozisyon
an He failed the examination. Examples and expressions:
Koule tèt To pour water over one’s
head to cool off. Fè cho; al koule tèt ou It’s hot; go
pour water on your head. Mango a koule The
mango dropped off before ripening.
koulè a n Color*.
kouleba adv To capacity. Chaje kouleba Loaded,
filled to capacity. Also: kou Legba. (V)
koulèv la n Snake. Koulèv andòmi Type of snake
found in Haiti.
koulibèt la n Blabbering.
koulin nan n A long machete.
koulis la n Slide (sliding).
koulout, ti koulout attrib Very stingy. Ou trò ti
koulout You are pinching pennies. You are very
stingy.
koulwa a n Corridor, passage, aisle, hall, hallway.
koulyea, kounyea, kou nou ye a adv Now, immediately.
M’te grangou; koulyea vant mwen plen
I was hungry; now I’m full.
koumabo interj Wow! (Exclamation of surprise
and admiration).
koumanman, komanman interj Oh hell!
koumanse V kòmanse
koumansman V kòmansman
koumapiston interj Wow! What a surprise!
koumasyal la n Court marshall*.
koumatiboulout interj Oh God!
koumbit la, konbit la n Cooperative bee among
country folk. V kòve.
kounan attrib Bow-legged, knock-kneed. Pye
kounan Bow-legged.
kounouk la n Tiny hovel, wretched hut, ‘dirty
hole’, straw hut, shack.
kounyea V koulyea
koup la 1
n 1. Cut (cards). Se koup mwen (or)
Se mwen ki pou koupe It’s my cut (turn). 2. Cut
(of a suit). 3. Haircut.
koup la 2
n 1. Cup*, goblet. Yon koup chanpay A
cup of champagne. 2. Cup*, trophy (in sports).
koup V kroup 3
koupab attrib Guilty. Deklare yon moun koupab
To convict s.o.
koupe vt 1. To cut, to nip off, to snip; to clip
(hair). 2. To cut (to dilute). 3. To have intercourse
(with). 4. To interrupt (a speaker). 5. To
cut (in a card game). 6. To cut off (a telephone
conversation). Examples and expressions: Koupe
asosye To make a formal contract of partnership
(or simply) To become partners. Kouto a koupe
anpil The knife is very sharp. Li tèt koupe ak
papa’l He is the spitting image of his father. Mango
sa a se koupe dwèt This mango is delicious. Koupe
pye To stop going somewhere (or) Not to set foot
anymore somewhere. Chemen koupe (or) Chemen
dekoupe Shortcut. An’n koupe fache Let’s break off
(our friendship). (Children’s talk). Tout diskisyon
koupe sèk The discussion was abruptly terminated.
koupè a n Cutter (of wood, sugar cane, etc.)
koupèdgòj la n Bandit, assassin, throat-cutter.
koupi V akoupi
kouple a, kouplè a n Verse, refrain (of a song).
koupon an n 1. Coupon* (lottery, etc.). 2. Cutting,
fabric necessary for a dress or suit.
koupye a, poupye a n Purslane. Portulaca oleracea
L.
koupyon an n Rump (animal’s).
kouran an n Current* (electric, water, etc.). Ou
toujou bezwen nan gran kouran You always want to
be in the (big) act, in important circles.
kourandè a n Draft. Pa chita nan kourandè a
Don’t sit in the draft. Pòch mwen gen kourandè I
am ‘broke’.
kouray la, kouraj la n Courage*; strength. Pran
kouraj Take heart. M’pa gen kouray pou’m leve I
don’t have the strength to get up. Pran kouraj ou
ak de men Get yourself together and resolve to act
(get going).
koure a n Boar. Also: koure kochon, mal kochon.
kouri 1
vi 1. To run, to run away. Kouri dèyè To
run after, to make after. M’ap kouri sou senkant an
I’m approaching 50. Ou pa ka kouri ak mwen You
can’t run with me. Vant kouri (or) Vant mennen
Diarrhea, running stomach. Lè m’wè kalite desè sa
a, bouch mwen kouri dlo When I saw that delicious
dessert, my mouth was watering. 2. To go fast
(ship, car). Ala oto kouri This car is a speedster.
3. ‘Kouri’ is sometimes used as auxiliary. Kouri
ale To go somewhere fast. Kouri antre To come in
running. Kouri travèse To run across.
kouri a 2
n Stampede, panic causing everyone to
run out fast. Te gen yon kouri lavil la, lè bonm
nan eklate a There was a panic downtown when the
bomb exploded. It was everybody for himself.
kouròn nan n Crown*.
kouronnen vt To crown*.
kous la n 1. Run. Tout kous At full speed. Li
pati yon kous He dashed away. Also: kous-kouri.
2. Race (competition). 3. Errands. M’gen kèk
kous pou’m fè maten an I have some runs to make
this morning.
K 104
kousen an n Cushion*. Kousen otomobil Car
seat.
kousikui a n Short circuit*.
kouskouri a n Running, dash. Pete yon kous-kouri
To dash (out), to start running.
kout 1
attrib Short, small.
kout 2
n From Fr. ‘coup de’. Blow. Kout kouto
Knife gash. Kout lang Slander. Kout pye A kick.
Bay kout pye To kick. Koupe kout je To snub
noticeably, to give a scornful look. Kout kat Rounds,
sessions (cards). An’n fè de kout kat Let’s play a
few hands of cards. Bay kout ba To renege on
one’s word, to sock it to s.o., to deceive, to let s.o.
down. Bay kout tèt To drop one’s head from time to
time when dozing off. Kout dan Bite. Bay yon kout
men To give a hand (help), to land a helping hand.
Bay kout pitit To bear a child by a man other than
the husband. Bay yon kout ponya To lend money at
a usurious rate. Pran kout ponya To borrow at a
usurious rate. Fè kout san To have a stroke (as a
result of anger). Kout tan Severe weather, sudden
storm. Yo te fè de kout zo They shot some dice.
koutay la, koutaj la n 1. Commission. 2. Illicit
gain.
koute 1
vt To listen, to hear. Ti zwezo tape koute
The birds were listening. Li pat koute konsèy mwen
He didn’t heed my advice. Pa koute kòlè ou Don’t
give vent to your anger, let it cool off.
koute 2
vi To cost*. Sa a koute de dola This one
costs two dollars.
kouti a n Sewing, needle-work, dressmaking,
seam. Roz al nan kouti Rose is learning needlework,
learning to sew.
koutim nan n Custom*, habit.
koutiryè a, koutiryèz la n Seamstress.
kouto a n Knife. Li rale kouto sou mwen He
pulled a knife on me. Ti bout kouto A small knife;
a piece of knife with a short blade. Kouto digo
Sickle. Kouto bouche Cleaver. Kouto de bò (or)
Kouto famasi Hypocrite, false two-faced person.
koutwazi a n Courtesy*.
koutye a n Broker, real estate agent, middleman.
kouvan an n Convent*. Antre nan kouvan To
enter a convent.
kouve vi To sit, to brood (hen). Poul la ap
kouve The hen is sitting (on eggs).
kouvè 1
attrib Overcast, covered* (sky).
kouvè a 2
n Place setting. Mete kouvè Set the
table.
kouvèti a n Cover*; sheet, bedclothes; lid; toilet
seat top.
kouvreli a n Bedspread.
kouvri vt 1. To cover*. 2. To cover* (or) to
mate with (animals).
kouwa a n Strap; fan belt.
kouwè V konwè
kouyadinay la n Stupidity.
kouyan an n 1. Intimate friend. 2. A person
who hobbles, limps.
kouyan kouyan, gouyan gouyan adv Hobbling
along, limping along.
kouyanbiz la n Friendship; familiarity. M’pa nan
kouyanbiz ak ou Keep your distance; don’t get too
familiar.
kouyè V kuiyè
kouyon an n Stupid fool, dumb person. Cf. It.
coglione.
kouzen an n Cousin* (male). Kouzen jèmen
First cousin. Kouzen soujèmen Second cousin. Rwa
pa kouzen’l (He thinks that) not even the king is
his cousin. He’s nothing but a big show-off.
kouzin nan n (Female) Cousin*.
kòve a n 1. Work group in the country. V koumbit.
2. Hard labor, forced labor; any difficult and
painful task. W’ap fè’m fè kòve You’re making me
work very hard.
koyibe vt To prohibit*, to eliminate. Yo koyibe’l
nan jwèt la. Li pa fouti jwe ankò They put him out
of the game. He can’t play anymore.
koyo a n An awkward person, particularly as far
as women are concerned. Sometimes applied to
a cuckold.
kòz la, lakòz n Cause*, motive, reason. Se li ki
te kòz ke... It was he who was responsible that...
Pou kòz For reason of, because of. Pou kòz maladi
Because of an illness. Avoka move kòz! You are
always defending the wrong cause! Ou fèt pou ou
responsab kòz ou You are responsible for your action.
koze 1
vi To chat, to talk, to converse. Nou rete
koze lontan We were chatting a long time. Koze ak
To chat with.
koze a 2
n 1. Chat, talk, conversation. 2. Situation,
event. M’pa konn anyen lan koze sa a I don’t
know anything about this matter. 3. Story. Vin
tande yon koze Come and listen to this story (gossip).
Cf. kozman.
kozè a n Big talker.
kozman an n Story. M’vin ba ou yon kozman I
come to tell you a story (or) I come to tell you what
happened.
krab la n 1. Crab*, land-crab*. Krab mal zòrèy A
type of crab that sticks to rocks, poles, etc., near the
seashore. Dan crab Claws. Anvi krab Hairlip. Fè
ti Jezi nan po krab To be a little Jesus (sham
innocence). Ou mare kon yon krab You are encumbered,
mixed up and awkward like a crab. 2. Yaws.
105 K
(A skin disease usually appearing on the sole of
the feet). Pye ou pa gen krab, depeche ou You
don’t have yaws in your feet, so hurry up.
krabanbara n Tarantula (spider). Also named:
Krabarenyen, areyeakrab, zarenyen krab.
krabarenyen V areyeakrab
krabè a n Ti krabè Rickety child, small, puny,
insignificant.
krabinay la, kabinay la n 1. Rubble. Machin nan
kraze; li fè krabinay The car crashed; it was reduced
to bits of rubble. 2. Insignificant person.
krabinen vt To smash to pieces; to disfigure.
krabye a n 1. Heron. One of the commonest of
West Indian birds. 2. An emaciated and tall
person.
krache 1
vi To spit, to expectorate. Piga ou
krache atè a Don’t spit on the ground.
krache a 2
n 1. Spit, saliva. Li se papa’l krache
He’s the spitting image of his father. Krache’l gen
san His saliva is tinged with blood. 2. Yon ti
krache A little bit.
krake vi 1. To chatter. Dan’l ap krake His teeth
are chattering. 2. To creak. Planche a ap krake
The floor is creaking. vt To crack* (one’s fingers).
kran an n 1. Notch, peg. 2. Guts (courage).
Mete kran On with it; do it.
kràn nan, krann nan n Skull. Also: kràn tèt.
krann adv Firmly.
kranp V lakranp
kranpon an n Spike, cleat (on shoes used in
sports).
krapday la n Piece, portion, a little something.
krapo a n Frog, toad. L’ap fè kòlè krapo He is
angry for nothing.
krapodin An krapodin Crouching. Cf.
akoukouman.
kraponnay V kaponnay
kraponnen V kaponnen
kras 1
attrib Stingy, penurious. Ala moun kras!
God, but they are stingy!
kras la 2
n 1. Dirt, filth. Kras vant Last-born
child. Kras nan dan Tartar on teeth, or small
particles of food on the teeth. 2. Bit, speck, crumb.
Ti kras A tiny bit. Se pa ti kras kòb li depanse He
spent a lot of money. Pa kras At all. Ou te di ou
ap vini, ou pa kras vini You said you would come;
you didn’t show up at all.
kraste a n Stinginess, avarice.
kravat la n Necktie, cravat*. V kòl.
kraz attrib Kò kraz Indolent, pooped, not energetic.
kraze 1
vt 1. To chew (up). Vale san kraze To
swallow whole. 2. To run down, to run over.
3. To break to pieces, to smash, to shatter, to
crush, to squash, to demolish. Kraze ak dan To
grind with the teeth. Kraze yon kay To demolish a
house. Kraze (tiye) mouch To swat flies. Kraze
rak (or) Kraze raje To disappear, to get lost, to
go away (and hide) in view of danger. Li tap kraze
yon dòmi He was sound asleep. L’ap kraze yon
manje He is savouring his food. Kraze brize To
vandalize, to break up to pieces. Nan pwen moun
kraze brize konsa There is no one who breaks up
things more than that person does. Ou te mèt kraze
brize, yo pap obeyi ou No matter what (the hell) you
do, they won’t obey you.
kraze 2
attrib Shabby, exhausted, down (person).
kraze a, ti kraze a 3
n A little change, a bit of
money. Ban’m yon ti kraze Give me some money.
krè Variant of the verb ‘kwè’ used in some regions.
krebete, grebete a n Scrawny, one who is insignificant,
unimportant, small; (usu) refers to children.
Often: ti krebete.
krèch la n Manger, crib.
kredi n Credit*. Vann kredi To sell on credit.
Achte kredi To buy on terms. Bay kredi To allow
(s.o.) to purchase on terms.
krèk la, krèt la n Clitoris. V langèt.
krèm nan, krenm nan n 1. Cream*; pomade
(facial cream). 2. Ice cream*, popsicle.
kremas la n An alcoholic beverage.
kremòl attrib Apathetic, slow, not on the ball,
wishy washy. Ou lan kremòl You can’t get going;
you are fooling around.
krenn vt To fear. Li krenn papa’l He is afraid of
his father. Cf. pè.
krent la n Fear.
krentitid la n Fear.
krepi vt To roughcast ( a wall).
krepin nan n 1. Funnel, measure. 2. Filter in a
car.
krepisay la n Roughcasting.
krepsòl la n Rubber usually used to make soles
for shoes and balls for children.
kreson an n Water cress*, Nasturtium aqua-ticum
L.
krèt la n 1. Crest*, comb of a cock (cock’s
comb). 2. As E. ‘crest’, ‘krèt’ is also used to
designate the ‘clitoris’. V krèk.
kreten attrib Slow learner; stupid fool, moron.
Cf. E. cretin*.
krètkòk la n Cockscomb* (flower).
K 106
krètkrèt la, kwètkwèt la n Red-legged thrush, a
type of tiny bird.
kretòn nan n 1. Type of ornamental plant. 2. Type
of fabric for dresses.
kretyen an, kriken n 1. Christian*. 2. Human
being, person (as in many Romance languages
and dialects). Kretyen vivan Living soul.
kreve vt 1. To puncture, to burst. Li te fè aksidan,
je’l kreve He had an accident, his eyes were ruptured.
2. To deflower, to seduce (a virgin). Se li ki
kreve tifi a It’s he who (first) got the girl’s cherry.
vi 1. To burst, to blow out. Karotchou a kreve
The tire is flat. 2. To be almost cooked (beans,
etc.). Pwa a poko kreve The beans are still raw
(they have not reached the stage called “kreve”
in cooking).
krevèt la, chevrèt la n Shrimp.
krèy, makrèy Yon krèy A lot of, many. Yon krèy
timoun A lot of children.
kreyatè a n Creator*.
kreyati a n Creature*.
kreye vt To create*.
kreyòl 1
la n Creole* language. MORISSEAULEROY-1:
M’ap ekri yon liv kreyòl I am writing a
book in Creole.
kreyòl 2
attrib Indigenous, native.
kreyon an n Pencil. Cf. E. crayon*. Fè pwent
kreyon an Sharpen the pencil. Kreyon adwaz Special
pencil used for writing on a slate.
kri 1
a n Scream, shout. Li pouse yon kri He
screamed.
kri 2
attrib 1. Raw, not cooked. 2. Violent, crude*.
kribich la, ekribich la n Shrimp. Kribich chode
Person with very light skin (pej).
krich la n Earthen (water) jug, pitcher without
handles, and with a thin neck.
krichon an n Small table with several holes in
which earthenware jugs are placed.
krik (onom) Li mouri san di krik He died without
uttering a word.
krik... krak Formula used as a preamble. The
storyteller will say “krik”. The audience will
answer “krak”, and the storytelling takes place.
Pou yon krik yon krak, li fache For any little thing,
he becomes angry; i.e. for no reason at all.
kriken V kretyen
krikèt la n Cricket* (insect).
krim nan n Crime*.
kriminèl la n 1. Criminal*. 2. (attrib) Bal kriminèl
An ultra riské, libertine dancing party.
kriminen vt To incriminate*.
krinolin nan n Material for hoop skirt, crinoline*.
krinyè a n Mane. Long hair; (usu) refers to
women.
krip krip (onom) Crunch, crunch. Describing
and imitating the sound of crisp food being
chewed and eaten.
kripya Avaricious, stingy, penny pincher.
krisifi a n Crucifix*.
krisifye vt To crucify*.
krismarin nan n Sariana maritima. Plants that
grow near the seashore.
kristal la n Crystal*, glass, glassware.
kristè a, klistè a n 1. Enema, clyster*. Common
word is ‘lavman’. The recipient for enema is
commonly called (named) bòk. 2. Bay kristè,
bay klistè To drive (someone) crazy, to pester, to
haunt, to bother.
kritike vt To criticize*. To find fault (with).
kriye vi 1. To be in tears, to cry*, to shed tears,
to weep; to cry out. V rele. Kriye, kriye’n medam
Cry, ladies, cry; weep your hearts out. 2. To squeak.
Si rou charyo a kriye, li merite grese If your wagon
wheels squeak, they need to be greased. 3. Kriye
pike To bawl (loudly).
kriyèl attrib Ruthless, cruel*.
kriz la n 1. Crisis*. 2. Fit of anger. 3. Sudden
seizure, attack of nerves. Li fè yon kriz He had a
seizure.
krizokal la n Imitation precious metals used as
jewelry (gold, silver, etc.). Costume (fake) jew-
elry.
kròbòt, kwòbòt vt To bend (nails, etc)
kroche a n Crochet*.
krochèt la, kòchèt, kwochèt, kròchèt n 1. Hook
(to close a door). 2. Tripping.
krochi V kochi
krochma V kochma
krochte vt To close, to shut a door tight with a
hook.
kròk la n 1. Fork of a plant, or a tree. A small
one is used as part of a slingshot (fistibal).
2. Hook, huge, monstrous tooth, fang. Yon gro
kròk dan A very big tooth. 3. Triangular wooden
collar placed around an animal’s neck to make
it extremely difficult for it to cross hedges, etc.
4. Difficulty, encumbrance. Gade yon kròk ou
mete nan kò ou Look at how much trouble you’re
causing yourself. 5. Li ban’m yon kròk He did me
a dirty trick. He tripped me. 6. Zepeng kròk Safety
pin.
krokay la n Embrace.
kroke V koke
107 K
kròkmò a n Gravedigger who also buries the
dead.
krokodil la n Crocodile*.
krokro a n Type of fish.
kròs la, kòs, kòf n Butt end of a gun. Li frape yo
ak kròs fizi a He struck them with the butt end of
his rifle.
kròt attrib Ill-kempt, not combed, curly, woolly,
kinky, dirty. Tèt mwen kròt My hair is kinky.
kroup 1
la n Croup* (illness).
kroup 2
la, koup n Croup* (of a horse). Lan
koup Behind (on the back of the horse).
krout la n 1. Crust*. 2. Grated bread crumbs.
3. Scab. Maleng nan geri, li kite krout The sore
healed but it left a scab.
kui a, kwi n Leather, hide. Kui tèt Scalp. Also:
po tèt.
kuipe, tuipe, kwipe, tchipe vi To smack one’s
lips audibly for several seconds to show disdain,
indifference, or contempt. Pa kwipe; m’pa fè ou
anyen la a pou’w fache Don’t smack your lips at me;
I didn’t do anything to make you angry. (Typical
Creole word).
kuis la, kwis n Thigh.
kuit, kwit, krit vt To cook, to bake, to stew. Kuit
tròp To overcook. Lè diri ap kuit When the rice is
being cooked. Manje a manke kuit The food is not
done.
kuiv la n Copper.
kuiyè a, kiyè, kouyè n Spoon. Ti kuiyè Teaspoon.
Gro kuiyè Tablespoon. Mwen ba li de kuiyè I gave
him two spoons. Vye tonton sa a chich kou do kuiyè
fè That old man is as stingy as nails (like the
back of an iron spoon). M’kenbe kiyè’m long ak
li I keep my distance from him.
kuizin nan, lakuizin, lakizin, koujin n Kitchen*.
Ale nan kuizin nan, ou a wè manje pa ou Go in the
kitchen (and) you’ll see your food.
kuizinyè a, kuizinyèz la n Lady cook.
kuizinyèz V kuizinyè
kwa a, lakwa n 1. Cross*. Fè kwa To resolve
never to repeat the act. 2. Torment, suffering.
Ala de kwa m’ap pote Boy, what troubles (problems)
I’m having; what a cross I’m bearing.
kwachaf la n Crankcase (automobile).
kwachyòkò a, kwatchyòkò n Kwashiorkor* (sickness
caused by malnutrition).
kwadi a n Group, squad* working with picks.
The synonym “esquad” is also making headway.
M’wè yon kwadi moun. Pa gen kote pou pike zepeng
I saw a crowd of people. There was no room to stick
a pin.
kwaf la, kwèf n Caul, secondina. Li fèt ak kwaf
He was born lucky, with a silver spoon in his mouth.
To be born with a caul.
kwafè a n Hairdresser, barber.
kwafèz la n 1. Hairdresser (applied to women).
2. Vanity (dresser).
kwafi a n Hairdo, coiffure*.
kwak, kwake conj Although, altho, tho. V byenke.
Li vini, kwak li te malad He came, although he was
sick.
kwak sa conj Nevertheless, in spite of that. Nou
fè prese, kwak sa nou rive an reta We hurried,
nevertheless we arrived late.
kwann nan, kwenn n Porkrind, pig skin with
some fat left on to be cooked.
kwape vt To rebuff. To reject completely.
kwasans la n Puberty. Fè kwasans To reach
puberty, to start menstruating. Pèdi kwasans To
stop menstruating (temporarily or permanently).
kwatchòkò V kwachyòkò
kwayans la n Belief, conviction, creed, faith.
kwaze vi To pass in opposite directions. vt To
cross* (arms, animals).
kwazelèuit Word used in a quadrille dance.
kwazman an n Crossing* (of animals, or of
telephone conversations when someone else is
on the line).
kwè, krè vt To believe. M’pa kwè sa I don’t
believe that. vi 1. To be a believer. Tou sa ki
kwè ap sove All those who believe will be saved.
2. To think. M’kwè l’ap vini I think he is coming.
kwen an n Corner, angle. Kwen kay A tiny, little
house or a room. Kwen bouch Commissure, corners
of the lips. M’rete tròp nan kay la; se pou m’al wè
kote lari fè kwen I have stayed too long in the
house; I have to take to the street now.
kwense vt To squeeze; to push into a corner, to
jam; to arrest. DEJEAN-59: Yo pral kwense ou
tout kote They are going to drive you into a corner.
M’kwense semenn sa a I’m broke this week.
kwi a, tchwi a n Bowl, container consisting of
half of a “kalbas” or gourd. Pran kwi To go
begging. Kwi pòv Beggar’s wooden bowl.
kwipe V kuipe
kwire a, kuiyre n Spoonful.
kwit V kuit
kwòbòt V kròbòt
kwochèt V krochèt
kyòlòlò, dlololo attrib Weak, watery coffee. V dlo.
kyoul V tyoul
L 108
kyoule V rekile
L
l 1
pers pron He, she, it (Contraction of li). Si’l
vle ale If he wants to go.
l 2
poss adj His, her, its. Papa’l His (her) father.
la 1
def art Determiner used postpositively, as in
Romanian, Swedish, and many African languages,
after a noun or phrase; roughly equivalent to
the English definite article. V a, an, nan. Tab
la The table.
la 2
, la a adv There, here. Jouk la Up to there, as
far as there. La menm Immediately, on the spot. Se
la pou ou la You have to be there. M’la Here I am.
I am getting along. I’m still here (there).
la 3
a n Bacon, lard*, grease. Lò ou fri la, li fè
luil When you fry bacon, you extract oil (grease).
la 4
adv Alive, living ( still around). Papa ou la
toujou? Non, papa’m mouri Is your father still
alive? No, my father died.
la yo def art plur The. Liv la yo The books.
laba, laba a adv 1. There, over there, down
there, (down) yonder. 2. Abroad, in those (foreign)
places.
labab V bab
labalèn V balèn
labank, bank la n Bank*.
labanyè a, banyè a n Banner*, standard. Nan
madigra moun ki pote labanyè toujou devan During
the Mardi Gras parade, those who carry the banners
are always in front. Pote labanyè To excel, to be
recognized as the best.
labapen an n Name of a plant (Artocarpus incisa)
which was once mistaken for the breadfruit plant.
V veritab.
labatwa a n Slaughterhouse, abattoir*.
labenediksyon V benediksyon
labèt la n Type of card game.
labib, bib la n The Bible*.
labim V abim
labitasyon V abitasyon
lablanchèt la n (pej) Woman with a very light
skin. Also kribich chode.
laboratwa a n Laboratory*.
laboryèz attrib Hard-working (fem).
labou a n Mud, dirt.
laboulòk V boulòk
laboure vt To plow.
labourè a n Farmer.
labouyi a, bouyi a n Porridge, pap, pudding.
(fig) Anything that can be mashed and contains
a liquid. Gen labouyi mayi, labouyi lamidon, labouyi
bannann There is ground corn porridge, starch,
and banana porridge. Li fè aksidan; oto pase sou
figi’l, figi’l tounen labouyi He had an accident. A
car ran over his head. His face looked like pap.
labrin nan, labrenn n Dusk, twilight, crepusculo.
V fènwa. Mari te sòti a labrin diswa, lè solèy tap
kouche Mary had gone out at dusk, when the sun
was setting.
labsent V absent
labveritab V veritab
lach attrib 1. Loose, lax*. 2. Coward(ly).
lachanm nan n House of Representatives (House
of Deputies, Lower House).
lacharite, lacharit, charite a n Alms, charity*. Fè
lacharite, bay lacharite To give alms.
lachas, chas n Hunting, hunt.
lache vt 1. To loosen, to slacken, to untie. 2. To
let down, to diminish. Lafyèv la lache’m My
fever has abated, has diminished.
lacho a n Lime (chalk). Cf. Founacho Lime-kiln.
lachte a n Cowardice. Fè lachte To commit an act
of cowardice.
ladan prep, adv In, therein, inside. M’mete ladan’l
solèy Dayiti I put in it Haiti’s sunshine. Ou antre
nan kay sa a deja? Non, m’panko antre ladan’l
Did you go into the house? No, I didn’t go in yet.
Mete ladan To include.
ladelivrans V delivrans
lademann n Formal proposal of marriage. Fè
lademann To make the formal request of the parents
so as to obtain official permission to marry.
ladènyè, ladennyè n Last trick (at a card game).
ladesant, la desant n 1. Descent*. 2. Stay. Fè
ladesant To stay somewhere (in a friend’s house, for
instance) during a trip. M’ap vwayaje, m’ap fè
ladesant kay kouzen’m, m’pa pral a lotèl I’m going
to take a trip; I’ll stay at my cousin’s (house). I
won’t stay in a hotel.
ladoba Fè ladoba To walk with the head and
shoulders bent forwards.
ladoudous V doudous
ladrès, adrès la n Address*, skill, adroitness,
tact. Li gen ladrès He is skillful.
ladwann nan, ladwàn nan n Customs, customs
house.
109 L
ladyablès la, dyablès la n She-devil, witch; wife
of the devil.
lafanmi V fanmi
lafendimonn End of the world.
lafèy la n Newspaper.
lafimen an n Smoke.
lafliksyon an, afliksyon an n Affliction*.
Lafrans, Frans n France*. Lafrans se yon gran
peyi France is a great country. Fè lafrans To flirt,
to kid around, to put on airs, to be snobbish. An
Frans In France. (In some contexts, e.g. when
used with the preposition an, la is omitted).
Farin Frans Imported white flour. Fig Frans fig.
lafrèch n Freshness (of the air), cool(ness).
lafrechè a n Prostitute.
Lafrik V Afrik
lafwa n Faith. Conviction, determination. M’a
bat ou ak lafwa I will give you a real thrashing.
Cf. fwa a.
lafyant la n Feces, excrement, shit.
lafyèv la, fyèv la, lafyèb n Fever*, temperature.
Lafyèv lèt Milk fever. Lafyèv pete lan bouch li His
lips have fever blisters. Lafyèv frison Fever with
shivers. Lafyèv palidis Malaria. Lafyèv skalatin
Scarlet* fever. Lafyèv jòn Yellow fever. Lafyèv
tifoyid Typhoid.
lagad n The army; guard*. Li antre lan lagad He
went into the army. Moute lagad To stand guard.
lagal la, gal la n Scabies.
lage vt To untie, to loosen; to free, to release, to
let loose, to let go, to let out; to desert, abandon,
to dump, to drop (s.o.) off. Examples and
expressions: MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-71: Li lage
kò’l nan dlo He jumped into the water. “Lage kò
(lan)” also means “to let one’s self go (into something)”.
Lage men’m, m’pa prale avè ou Let go of
my hand; I’m not going with you. Lekòl lage avan
katrè School let out before four o’clock. Ou lage nan
prizon You were freed from jail. Lage’m lavil
Drive me downtown. Nou lage yon boulin We
dashed off. Li lage sa He died. vi 1. To go to
ruin, on evil ways. Tifi a fin lage The girl let
herself go; (she lives her life). She went on evil
ways. 2. To get soft. Tiye dife a kou vyann nan
lage Put out the fire when the meat gets soft.
lagè a n War*, warfare*. Fè lagè To wage war.
Deklare lagè To declare war.
lago a n Tag (children’s game). Lago kache,
lago bouche The game of hide and seek. Ki moun
ki bouche? Who is it? Y’ap fè lago kache They’re
playing hide and seek. Also kachkach.
lagon an n Lagoon*, swamp.
Lagonav Island of Lagonave. Ban’m van pou m’al
Lagonav Leave me alone, please. L’al Lagonav
He has lost his virility.
lagonni an, agoni an n Death throes, agony*.
lagonni, lagoni, agoni vi To be in death throes.
lagoum nan n Mucous in a horse’s mouth.
lagratèl la n 1. Jelly fish. 2. Type of plant similar
to poison ivy.
lagrèl la, lagrenn nan n Hail.
lagrenn V lagrèl
lagrikilti V agrikilti
lagròt V gròt
laj 1
la, lay la n Age*. De timoun sa yo gen menm
laj men yo pa menm otè Those two children are the
same age, but they are not the same height. Ki laj
ou? How old are you? Yo pap ba’l laj li He
doesn’t look his age.
laj 2
attrib 1. Wide, broad, large*. Kay la trè laj
The house is broad. Vin pi laj To broaden. 2. Gen-
erous.
lajan an n Money. Manman lajan Capital (money).
Fòk ou travay pou ou fè lajan To make money you
have to work. Yon gro lajan A considerable sum.
Moun lajan Rich people.
lajantri V ajantri
lajè a n Width, breadth. Bouch li louvri tout lajè
His mouth is wide open.
lajenès n Youth (childhood).
laji, elaji vt To spread, to widen, to enlarge*, to
broaden. vi To become wider.
lajistis, jistis la n Justice*, legal tribunal. M’pral
lajistis avèk ou pou’m konnen si ou pap renmèt
mwen lajan’m I’m going to take you to court to see
if you won’t give me back my money.
lajonis, jonis la, lajonnis n Jaundice*.
lajounen an, jounen an n Daytime, day. Gro
lajounen In broad daylight. Lajounen yo ret anba
fèy In the daytime they stay under the leaves.
lajwa V jwa
lak 1
la n Lake*.
lak 2
la n 1. Trap. Ou ap eseye pran’m nan lak
You are trying to trick me (or) to take me in a trap
(or) to trap me. 2. Bait. V delake.
lakadans V kadans
lakal V kal
lakalmi V kalmi
lakanpay, lakanpany n The countryside. L’ap
bat lakanpany He is dying. He is in the throes of
death.
L 110
lakansyèl la n Rainbow. MORISSEAULEROY/D-23:
Tout lannuit nou pral reve lakansyèl
We’ll dream of rainbows all night long.
lakapital V kapital
lakat n Pèdi lakat To become disoriented, to lose
control of one’s self. Pinokyo pèdi lakat, li mete
bege Pinocchio lost control of himself, and started to
stammer.
lakataw n Thunder. Lakataw fè taw, nan Ginen
tande’l The thunder is growling; you can hear it as
far away as Africa (Haitian riddle).
lakay n Home, house, at the house of. Depi
maten m’chita lakay mwen I have been sitting at
home all morning. M’pral lakay papa’m I’m going
to my father’s house. M’pral lakay I am going
home. V kay.
Lakayè V Akayè
lakèt V kèt
lakilbit la n Somersault. Fè lakilbit To do a
somersault.
lakilti a, kilti a n 1. Culture*. 2. Farming, agriculture*.
Tout richès yon peyi se nan lakilti li ye
All the wealth of a nation lies in its agriculture.
lakizin V kuizin
lakobat, akrobat la n 1. Acrobatics*, performing
of stunts. 2. Acrobat*.
lakòl la, kòl n Glue, paste. Tablèt lakòl Type of
sticky peanut or coconut brittle. Kòl fòt Glue.
lakolèt la n Collection (in a church). Also kèt.
lakoloni V koloni
lakomèt V komèt
lakomin nan n Town hall, city hall.
lakominyon an n (Holy) Communion*.
lakonpayi Mesye dam lakonpayi Ladies and gen-
tlemen.
lakòt Li fè lakòt She is a prostitute. V kòt.
lakou 1
a n 1. Yard, courtyard*, enclosure. Bale
lakou a To sweep the yard. Li se gran tifi nan
lakou madan plètil She looks naive, but she is more
“experienced” than you think she is. 2. A group of
houses, usually facing a common courtyard, housing
related families constituting a unit, a small
hamlet into itself, with adjacent cemetery, etc.
Gro lakou Huge household, one big family. 3. Group
of shacks built along a narrow crooked alley
inside a city block, for instance “lakou Brea”, in
Port-au-Prince.
lakou 2
Fè lakou To court, to try to seduce.
lakoubèt Fè lakoubèt To bow; to bow excessively, to
lower one’s self.
lakoutim, koutim n Custom*, habit, usage. Se
lakoutim That’s the custom. Se you move koutim
It’s a bad custom.
lakoz, lakòz n Reason, cause*. Pòl ki lakòz sa
rive It’s Paul who caused that to happen.
lakranp la, kranp la n Cramp*.
lakre a, lakrè a n Chalk.
lakuizin V kuizin
lakwa V kwa
lakwann, laskwann interj The heck with you!
lalèp, lèp la n Leprosy*.
lalin nan n 1. Moon. Lalin klere aswè a The
moon is bright tonight. 2. Type of fish. 3. Menstruation,
period. Fi a gen lalin li The woman is
having her period.
laliy 1
nan, liy nan n Taxi, cab (no regular route
or line*). Fè laliy To drive a cab. MORISSEAULEROY/D-25:
M’jete’m nan laliy I went into the
taxi (driving) business. I became a cab driver.
laliy 2
Fè laliy To watch one’s figure.
lalo Mare yon lalo To obtain magical powers for a
specific purpose.
lalout la n Scarecrow; effigy, dummy.
lalwa 1
Variant of “lwa”. Fè lalwa To command, to
give orders. Gen lalwa To have the right to.
lalwa 2
a n Aloe*. Aloe vera L. A bitter plant
with hemplike fibers, and huge, pointed and
prickly leaves. Pa gen anyen ki pi anmè pase lalwa,
men li fè konfiti There’s nothing more bitter than
lalwa and yet they make a fine jam from it.
lalwèt la n Uvula*. Lalwèt teta A garrulous
person, an incessant babbler. Li abiye tankou lalwèt
boure She’s dressed like a stuffed bird (usually said
of a badly dressed, large woman).
lam 1
V lanm
lam 2
(veritab) V veritab
lamadèl Fè lamadèl 1. To drive around in search of
passengers before the bus definitely leaves. 2. To
walk back and forth.
lamama a n Money.
lamanten an n Sea-cow. Lamantin*.
lamarye a, lamaye a n Bride.
lamayòt la; lamayèt la n At fairs, an object in a
box which will be shown to you for a price.
lame a n Army*. You lame A large quantity of.
lamè 1
Mother, elderly woman. Used mostly as a
title. Kot lamè? Where’s mother? The same for
“lepè” V.
lamè 2 V
lanmè
lamedsin n Medical science.
111 L
lamegrè Leanness; lean person.
lamenfòt Pote lamenfòt To bring help, reinforcements.
lamenm, la menm adv On the spot, immediately.
PRESSOIR-42: Pou’l ta manje yo tou, la menm So
that he would also eat them on the spot.
lamès V mès
lamidon V lanmidon
lamitye 1
V amitye
lamitye 2
a, amitye, lanmetye, lanmitye n Spanish
moss, a medicinal, parasitic (epiphytic) plant
(Cuscuta americana).
lamizè V mizè
lamò V lanmò
lamòd V mòd
lamwa a, amwa a n Tall wardrobe, closet.
lan 1
, nan prep In. Cf. ladan. PRESSOIR-11:
Nan fon je bèl demwazèl la In the eyes of the
beautiful dragonfly.
lan 2
, nan def art sing The. Plim nan The pen. V
a, la, an.
lan 3
, lant attrib Slow. (“lant” is used with some
Creole words that are feminine in French).
lanavèt Fè lanavèt To shuttle, to travel back and
forth.
lanbe vt 1. To lick. 2. To flatter.
lanbè a n Flatterer, licker, sucker; indecisive
person.
lanbi 1
a n Conch, conch shell, the beautifully
colored spiral shell of the Strombus gigas used as
a horn or left on tables for decorative purposes.
It is more famous than the gastropod itself (which
is a delicacy) because it denotes a “call to revolt”.
lanbi 2
Apocope for “lanbisyon” used in the
expression “gen (gro) lanbi” To become too ambitious*,
presumptuous.
lanbisyon V anbisyon
lanbouchi a, anbouchi a, bouchi a n Embouchure*,
mouth of a river.
landmen V lelandmen
landrèt, landwat n Face or right side of a fabric
or material as opposed to ‘lanvè’ (the back side).
lane V ane
lanèj la, nèj la n Snow. DEJEAN-44: Rad li te
blan kouwè lanèj Her dress was white as snow.
lanèt la, lannèt la n Bird of prey. Cf. E.
Lanneret*.
lanfè a, anfè a n Hell, inferno*. Mezanmi!
Kijan fè l’fè cho konsa? Gen lè pòt lanfè ouvè Boy,
oh boy! What makes it so damn hot? It feels like
hell’s doors are open.
lang nan n 1. Tongue. Li gen lang sal. Li pale
moun mal He is foulmouthed. He speaks evil of
people. 2. Language*. Kreyòl se yon bèl lang Creole
is a beautiful language.
langaj la, langay la n 1. Term used when the
houngan speaks in “tongues” i.e. some language
reminiscent of the language spoken by the ancestors
in Africa. Pale langaj Cabalistic terminology,
to speak the ritual words of a Vodou service. 2. Crazy
talk or simply unintelligible speech. Language*.
langè a n Foul-mouthed, slanderous, one who
has a bad tongue.
langèt la n Clitoris. V krèk. Langèt manman ou!
(Ultra vulgar insult). Cf. E. Mother fucker.
langèz, landjèz attrib Foul-mouthed, slanderous
(used for females).
langichat la, langchat, langlichat n Thorough-wart.
Eupatorium odoratum L.
langous la, langouch la n Crayfish, langouste*.
V roma.
lani V lanni
lanj V anj
lanjelis la, anjelis la n Twilight, dusk, Angelus*.
lank 1
la n Ink. Lank la rouji pòch chemiz la The
ink made the shirt pocket red.
lank 2
la n Anchor*. Leve lank To weigh anchor.
To leave, to get moving. Jete lank To drop the
anchor.
lankriye a, ankriye a n Inkwell.
lanm nan, lam nan n 1. Wave (sea). 2. Blade,
sword.
lanman an n Nightshade, a very common medicinal
plant. Solanum nigrum L.
lanmè a, lamè a, mè n Sea, ocean. M’rantre
Jeremi pa mè I came to Jérémie by sea. Bò lanmè a
On the shore, sea side. Sale kon lamè Jakmèl Very
salty.
lanmèd, nanmèd, mèd interj Fuck you!
lanmen Handshake. Bay lanmen To shake hands.
lanmès V mès
lanmidon an, lamidon an n 1. Starch. 2. Manioc
flour.
lanmò a, lamò a n Death, demise. Restan lanmò
This is said of a person who has cheated death.
lanmori a, mori a n Codfish.
lanmou an, amou an n Love. Fè lanmou To
make love. V damou.
lanmyann interj The heck with you! Go to the
devil!
lanni an, lani an, ani an n Anise*. Foeniculum
vulgare Mill. Cf. anetwale.
L 112
lannuit la, lannwit, nannuit, nannwit n Night, at
night, during the night. V nuit.
lanp la n Lamp*, night lamp, lampion, light.
Lanp oto Headlight. Lanp luil Oil lamp. V gridap.
Tiye lanp, limen lanp To put out, put on the light.
Lanp la mouri The light is out. Lanp kerozin
Kerosene lamp. V bòbèch.
lanpa a n Lampas* (a mouth disease of horses).
lanprè a, lanperè, lanpèrè n Emperor*.
lans 1
la n Lance*.
lans 2
la n 1. Handle. 2. Creek, bay.
lansan an, ansan an n Incense*. Yo boule lansan
pou chase move espri They burned incense to chase
away evil spirits.
lanse vt 1. To throb, to hurt (pain) intermittently.
Dan an ap lanse’m I have a stinging pain in my
tooth which comes and goes. I feel twinges of pain.
2. To lasso.
lantèman V antèman
lanti a n Lentil* (s).
lantiray V lantouraj
lantouraj la, lantiray, antouray n Fence, enclosure,
hedge. Cf. E. Entourage*.
lanvè a n Reverse, wrong side, back of material
(cloth, etc.). Cf. landrèt. (adv) Li mete rad li
lanvè He put on his clothes inside out (wrong side).
Je lanvè Squint eyed. Alanvè Inside out.
Lapannkòt la n Pentecost*.
laparans la, aparans n Appearance*.
laparèy The same. L’ap rann ou laparèy He’s
going to do the same to you (that you did to him).
laparòl Gen laparòl To have the floor. Bay laparòl
To recognize (in parliamentary procedure). Pèdi
laparòl To become speechless. Pran laparòl To
address (a group), to start talking.
lapat 1
n Paw. Bay lapat Give (me) your paw.
Mete (poze) lapat sou To lay hands on, to grab.
Cf. pat.
lapat 2
la n A type of glue, paste*.
lapatitye a n Pharmacist, druggist.
lapè 1
V pè a
lapè 2
n Fear, scare, fright.
lapèch la, pèch n Fishing. Li fè bòn pèch jodi a
He had a good catch today. M’pral lapèch I am
going fishing.
lapen an n Rabbit.
lapenn nan, lapèn n Sadness, (mental) pain*,
grief, sorrow. Fè lapenn To cause sorrow, to
grieve; to distress. Sa fè’m lapenn anpil It grieves
me immensely. Ala lapenn! How sad! M’pran
lapenn prepare’l pou ou I took the trouble to prepare
it for you. Sa pa vo lapenn It’s not worthwhile, it’s
not worth the trouble.
laperèz n Fear. Bay laperèz To make someone be
afraid, to scare.
lapès la, pès n Pest*.
lapèsonn nan n The individual in question.
lapeti V apeti
lapipi a, lapepi n Pip* (contagious disease of
birds, in particular, poultry). Lapipi a pa dire
sou poul la The hen got rid of the pip.
laplaj V plaj
laplanch Fè laplanch To float on one’s back in the
water.
laplas 1
, plas la n Public square. Plas dam
Piazza*, square. Sou plas la In the main square.
laplas 2
la n 1. Shortened form of komandan
laplas. The military man in charge of the town
with full powers. 2. Chief assistant to the houngan,
similar to a master of ceremonies.
laplenn nan, laplèn, plèn n Plain*.
lapli a, laplui a n Rain. Lapli tonbe san rete It’s
raining nonstop. Dlo lapli Rain water. Sezon
lapli Rainy season. Lapli a tonbe a gro droum
(or) A gro gode; a roulo It’s raining cats and
dogs.
lapolis n Police*, police station.
Lapolòy n Poland*. Chaje kon Lapolòy To be
really loaded down. To be carrying heavy loads. Cf.
chaje kon Legba.
laponyèt Bat laponyèt To masturbate. (syn) “fè
dye sèl mevwa”
lapòs la n 1. Postal* service, post* office. Mete
you lèt lapòs To mail a letter. M’ap rive lapòs I
am going to the post office. 2. Holes in one’s
stockings.
lapotitye a n Pharmacist, druggist.
lapoud V poud
lapousinyè a n Pleiades (stars). Li gran pase
lapousinyè He’s very, very old.
laprit interj Ale ou laprit! (or simply) “Laprit!”
Go to hell!
lapriyè 1
a, priyè a n Prayer*. M’konn you priyè ki
trè bon I know a prayer which is very good.
lapriyè 2
vi To pray*.
lapròptay n Fè lapròptay To clean up.
laprosesyon an, posesyon an n Procession*.
larad la, rad la n Harbor. Deep sea.
laraj V raj
laras V ras
113 L
larat la n Spleen (anat).
larèn nan, larenn, renn n Queen. Fanm sa a se
renn bouzen (or) “manman bouzen” This woman
is a real whore.
lareverans, reverans n Greetings; respect.
larezon V rezon
larezone, larezonnen Happy New Year. Fo m’al
swete’l larezone I have to go wish him a Happy New
Year.
lari a, ri a n Street. Pran lari To go out. Se yon ri
senp It’s a one-way street. Li lè pou m’al wè kote
lari fè kwen It’s time for me to go out on the street,
out of the house. Lari a blanch The street is empty.
Fò ou vire apre sis ri You must turn after six
crossings (blocks).
larim nan n Nasal mucus from a runny nose.
Timoun nan te gen “de ran dlo de ran larim” The
child was really crying.
larivyè V rivyè
laronn nan n 1. Round*, circle. 2. Round*
(game). V lavironn.
larontèz n Shame. (syn) ront.
laroujòl la n Measles.
larouy la, rouy n Rust*.
larouze a, laroze a n Dew. Choukèt larouze
Member of the rural police force.
laròz, ròz n Menstruation.
las 1
la, as la n Ace* (in card games). Li gen you
las He has an ace.
las 2
la, as la n Asthma*.
lasal la n Living room, salon*. V sal.
lasante V sante
lase vt To lace*.
lasèldedo Sou lasèldedo Lying on one’s back.
Lasenjan an n The feast of St. John* (June 24).
lasèt la n Shoe string, shoe laces.
lasi a n Wax; ear wax (cerumen), rheum. Lasi
nan je Yellow mucus secreted by the glands in the
eyes. Je lasi Bleary eyed.
lasibab la n Leftover (food, etc.).
lasigal, sigal la n Cicada*.
lasini an, lazini an (North), lasnik la n (Arsenic*)
poison. V asenik.
lasirèn, sirèn nan n The siren* (myth).
lasisin Fè lasisin To tantalize, to tease someone
while eating by letting him know that what you are
eating is delicious.
laskwann V lakwann
lasosyete V sosyete
laswè V suè
lasyans la, syans la n Science*.
lasye V asye
latanye a, latanyen an n Latania*, Bourbon palm;
macaw tree.
latcha a n Ass (butt). (syn) bounda.
latè V tè
laten an n Latin* (language).
lateny nan, lateng n Ringworm (usually on the
scalp).
lateras V teras
latètopye, delatètopye adv From head to toe.
latou, la tou adv On the spot, immediately.
Latou, li mouri He died on the spot.
latoudin nan, latoudlin n Dizziness. M’gan latoudin
My head is spinning.
latounay la n Dizziness. Cf. toudisman.
Latousen an n All Saints* day.
latranblad la, tranblad la n Trembling*. Lapè
fè’l gen latranblad Fear gives him the shakes.
latrin nan n W.C., toilet, latrine*, outhouse.
latristès V tristès
latriye You latriye A large number of, a large
quantity of, a lot of. E latriye And so forth.
lavabo a n Washbowl.
lavalas la n Flood, torrent, torrential rain.
lavaltay V valtay
lavandyè a, lavandyèz la n Washerwoman.
FARDIN-17: Lavandyè pran chemen larivyè The
washerwoman goes to the river. V lesivyè.
lavandyèz V lavandyè
lavant la, vant la n Trading, sale. Kòman lavant
la te ye jodi a? How was trading today? An vant
For sale. Fè bon lavant To make good sales.
lavaris la, avaris la n Avarice*.
lave vt To wash, to clean. Lave tèt a.) To wash
one’s head. b.) To brain wash. c.) To become
dead drunk. d.) To insult. e.) A ritual for
removing a lwa from a person’s head (COURLANDER).
Lave je a.) To wash the newborn
baby’s eyes with a two per cent solution of silver
nitrate, one drop in each eye. b.) Eye opener. Ou
ap pran you ti lave je? Are you taking a swallow?
Lave pase To wash and iron. Lave lang sou yon
moun To speak evil about someone.
laverans, reverans n Fè laverans To greet someone
with respect, to bow with reverence*.
L 114
laverite V verite
lavèy la n The night before, eve. Cf. E. Vigil*.
lavi a, vi a n Life. Anvi, an vi Alive. L’ap fè vi’l
He gets along, he earns a living. Ban’m you ti lavi
Give me a little something to live on. Rann you
moun lavi di To make it hard for someone; to give
someone a hard time.
laviktwa V viktwa
lavil la n In town, to town, town. V vil. M’pral
lavil I’m going into town. Li te lavil lò lapli a
kòmanse She was downtown when the rain started.
lavironn nan n Runaround, turn, pirouette, a
complete turn made while participating in certain
children’s games. Fè lavironn To keep making
turns.
lavironn dede n Children’s game in which they
turn around and around.
lavman an n Enema. V klistè.
lavoum interj Go to the devil! The heck with
you!
lavwa Gen lavwa To have the right to talk. Ou pa
gen lavwa Keep quiet.
Lavyèj, Lavyèy n Virgin* Mary.
lay 1
la n Garlic. Allium sativum. You dan lay A
clove of garlic.
lay 2
V laj
laye 1
vt To winnow. V vannen.
laye 2
(kò) vt To stretch out.
laye 3
a V layo a
layite vt To display. To spread. Nouvèl la ap
layite The news is spreading. Layite machandiz
To display merchandise.
layo a, laye a n Winnowing basket or tray.
le 1
On, the (French definite article used in
Creole to indicate dates). Le 4 avril On April
fourth; the fourth of April.
le 2
, lè (French definite articles used in Creole in
set phrases). Le matin, le swa In the morning, in
the evening. Tou lè maten Every morning.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-13: Toulede se te frè’m
Both were my brothers. Lè sen, lè mò The saints,
the dead. Le swa, lè solèy la frèt In the evening,
when it’s cool.
lè 1
a n Time (hour, moment). Li gen lè’l He
has his good and bad moments. Li san lè pou’l rive
He can arrive any minute now. Yon lè konsa Once
in a while, rarely, seldom. A lè On time. Ki lè li
ye? What time is it? Li lè li tan It’s high time.
“Lè” is often replaced by “lò”. Depi lè a (or)
Depi lò a Since then, since that time.
lè 2
a n 1. Air*. 2. Appearance. 3. Musical tune.
Examples and expressions: Nan lè In the air.
An lè, anlè Above, in the air, high. Ban’m lè Give
me room, get out, get going. Pou chase tout move lè
(zè) To chase away all evil spirits. Gen lè It seems
that, it appears that. Anlè anlè Flighty, listless,
scatter-brained. Tifi sa a anlè anlè This girl is too
flighty, not serious enough. Ou gen lè ou fou; ou
ban’m kou pou anyen It seems that you’re crazy; you
hit me for no reason at all. Pran lè To get some
fresh air.
lè 3
conj When, at the time when. Lè li te rive
When he arrived. V lò.
lebra Bay lebra To give someone one’s arm when
walking
lèch 1
la n Thin slice, piece.
lèch 2
la n Lèch bannann Dry banana leaf.
lèd 1
la, èd la n Aid*, help.
lèd 2
attrib Ugly, homely. Ala lèd moun sa a lèd!
He is horrible. He’s a fright. Boy, he’s ugly! Li lèd
a mò He’s ugly enough to scare you. Lèd tankou
foskouch makak Ugly as a monkey!
ledè a, laledè n Ugliness.
ledikasyon V edikasyon
ledven V leven
ledwa V dwa
lèfini, lè fini, lòfini, lò fini adv Then, further,
and then, afterwards. Li manje, lèfini li kouche
He ate, then he went to bed.
lèg la, èg la n Eagle*.
legal attrib Proper(ly), correct(ly); legal*.
Legba n Vodou god. Chaje kou Legba To be
overloaded, to be carrying heavy loads. (Also “chaje
koule ba”)
legede V gede
legen Bay legen To give up, to concede victory.
legim nan n Vegetable, greens.
legliz la, egliz la n Church.
legoyin V goyin
leje, lejè attrib Light ( in weight).
lejitim attrib Legitimate*, normal.
lekiri V ekiri
lekòl la, ekòl n School, college, school building;
class. Mete lekòl 1. To put in school. 2. To pawn.
3. To found a school. Se lekòl lage. There is no
more restraint; now you do as you please.
lèkonsa, lè konsa adv At those times; by now. Li
move souvan, lèkonsa li kraze tout bagay He gets
angry very often and in those times he smashes everything.
Si ou te ale, lèkonsa ou ta deja rive If you
had left, you would be there by now.
lekontrè The opposite. Okontrè On the contrary*.
lekriti V ekriti
115 L
lekti a n Reading.
lektrik V elektrik
lektrisite V elektrisite
lelandmen, landmen, landemen, nandemen The
following day. Lelandmen maten The following
morning.
lele a n A plant with an edible fruit (Area of
Corail near the city of Jérémie).
lelit V elit
lelmi V énmi
lemal n Evil.
leman an, eman, lèman n Magnet; charm against
evil spirits.
lemante vt To attract. Dlo lemante (Se premye
dlo ou ranmase lè yon fanm ki ansent marasa
koumanse kaselèzo) (Franketienne, Bobomasouri,
page 54).
lemarye n Bridegroom.
lemetik Mete lemetik sou lepika To make matters
worse.
lemo Yo bay lemo They have an understanding.
lèmò n The dead. Manje lèmò A Vodou ceremony
in which food is offered to the dead.
lemoman At the moment when...Se pa lemoman
It is not the time for that. BEAUBRUN/A-8:
Lemoman mwen reve... At the moment when I
dreamt that...
lemonn n World. Li fè antre nan lemonn She
made her debut.
lèn V lenn
lenba a n Charm, spell, magic. Mare yon lenba
To prepare a charm, to obtain magical powers.
lendeng, nandeng attrib Persistent, pestering per-
son.
lendepandans V endepandans
lene The eldest. Usually “pi gran”. Lene pitit
mwen yo My eldest child.
lenfranjit la, enfranjit la n An illness characterized
by swollen feet.
lengratitid V engratitid
lenj la n Sanitary napkin for women. Kotex. Cf.
kòt. Also called twal san.
lenkonduit V enkonduit
lenkyetid V enkyetid
lénmi V énmi
lenn 1
nan, lèn n Wool, woolen covering, woolen
bed cover.
lenn 2
nan, lèn n Groin.
lenò V nò
lenpresyon V enpresyon
lento a n Lintel*.
lèp 1
la, lalèp n Leprosy*.
lèp 2
Double six in dice; doubleton. M’fè lèp I
won with double six.
lepe V epe
lepè n Old man. Kot lepè? Where is the old man?
lepèdan an n Looser.
lepèt Nothing. Li kwè li se you gro zafè, li pa you
lepèt He thinks he is a big shot but he is nothing.
lepika Mete lemetik sou lepika To make matters
worse.
lepit la, epit n Epistle*, story, narration. Li
ban’m tout lepit fanmi ou He told me the whole
story of your family.
leplisouvan, le pli souvan adv Mostly, more
often than not.
lerè V erè
lèrending Late (unreasonable) hour.
leritaj V eritaj
lerouj Type of game of chance.
lès 1
la n Ballast. L’ap fè lès He is relenting
somewhat.
lès 2
, èst n East*.
lese vt 1. To leave, to quit, to abandon; to let, to
allow. Lese grennen Let it be. Pay it no mind.
Forget it. Lese pase To overlook. Lese frape To
push, bang and shove each other during the carnival
times usually. 2. To depart (from), to go away
(from).
lesèk Dry season.
lesen Bay lesen To breastfeed. Usually bay tete.
lèsen n The saints*, the spirits.
lesepase a n Pass*, official permit to cross over.
Si ou pa gen lesepase, yo pap kite ou travèse If you
don’t have a pass, they won’t let you cross over.
lesetonbe a n Free for all, referring to a dropped
ball (in a basketball game).
Leseyè V Seyè
lesiv la n Laundry. Fè lesiv To wash clothes.
lesivyè a n Washerwoman, laundress. V lavandyè.
leskalye V eskalye
leson an n Lesson*.
lespri a, espri n Spirit*, ghost; intelligence. Moun
lespri A wise, intelligent, educated person.
lespwa V espwa
L 116
leste vt To ballast*.
lestomak la, lestonmak, estomak n Stomach*,
chest, breast. Pa pote lestonmak ou bay lénmi ou
Don’t expose yourself to your enemies.
leswa, le swa At night, in the evening.
lèt 1
la n Milk; sap. Lèt bèf Cow’s milk. Lèt kaye
Curdled milk. Lèt kokoye Coconut milk. Kou lèt
ak sitron Like milk and lemon juice. They don’t
mix. They don’t get along. Lèt poko sot lan nen’l
He is still young and inexperienced. Lèt la tounen
The milk is turning (sour). Nouris la san lèt The
young mother is dry. She can’t nurse her child. Lèt
metsiyen Latex (sap) from the ‘metsiyen’ tree
used as a laxative. Lèt kondanse Condensed milk.
Nouris la pa kap bay pitit li tete ankò, li gen lèt
pase apre’l te fè kòlè The young mother cannot
nurse her child any longer; her milk went bad after
an emotional stress.
lèt 2
la n Letter* (of the alphabet).
lèt 3
la n Letter* (a written message).
leta a n Government authority. Official of the
state*.
leta sivil, eta sivil Bureau of vital statistics. Ofisye
eta sivil Registrar of vital statistics (births, deaths,
etc.).
letajè V etajè
letan an, etan an n Pond, lake, pool. Letan sèl
Salt lake.
letanp la V etanp.
leten V eten
letènèl n God. Also pè etènèl.
leti a n Lettuce*. Tèt leti Head of lettuce.
letikèt V etikèt
letouf la, letoup la n Oakum, tow, cotton waste,
caulking.
levanjil la n 1. Gospel. 2. Protestantism (euph).
L’antre lan levanjil He converted to Protestantism.
levasyon an n Rearing (of children). Fè levasyon
timoun To rear children (pop).
leve vi 1. To get up, to awaken, to wake. 2. To
rise. vt 1. To lift, to raise. 2. To rear, to
educate. 3. To remove an employee in order to
transfer him to another post. Examples and
expressions: Li tonbe l’leve He fell and rose
again. Leve pye ou Get a move on. Let’s go, let’s
start. Hurry. Raise your hind pot. Mal leve To
get up in a bad mood. Leve you pàn To repair, to
get a motor started after a breakdown. Li pap leve
ni lou ni lejè He is lazy. Also He is unemployed.
leveche a n Bishopric; Bishop’s residence.
leven an, ledven, lelven n Leaven*, yeast, baking
powder.
levennman V evénman
levit la n Jacket; a formal short coat, elegant
lounging jacket. Also vès, palto.
levye a n 1. Lever*. 2. Gearshift.
lèwa a, lewa n Epiphany (Jan 6). M’pral pase
lèwa Gonayiv I’m going to spend Epiphany at Gona-
ives.
lèy Fè yon lèy To glance, to peep, to peek. Move lèy
Evil eye. Malocchio.
leyèt la n Baby linen, layette*.
lèz 1
la n Edge.
lèz 2
la n Very thin slice of meat, wood, cloth; a
piece of material, gore. You lèz vyann A slice of
meat. You lèz twal A piece of material. Jip an lèz
A skirt made out of different pieces of material.
lèz 3
, zèz Ease*. Pran lèz To have a good time, to
make one’s self comfortable.
leza a n Iguana, lizard*. V aganman, mabouya,
zandolit.
lezam n Weapons. Yo pran lezam They revolted
and took up arms*.
lezanj V anj
lèzèl Sou lèzèl, soulèzèl 1.) Secondary.
FRANKETIENNE/P-8: Ou konn gou dyòl ou. Ou
pa tap janm ale lan yon estasyon soulèzèl 2.)
Informally, with difficulty, indirectly.
FRANKETIENNE/D-114: Sou lèzèl nou ravitaye
lan pousyè nan labou anba solèy anba lapli.
lèzo V kase
lèzòm, lezòm n Mankind, men.
lezòt indef adj & pron Other, the other...(pl).
V lòt.
li 1
pers pron Third person singular personal
pronoun, as subject or as object. It may be
translated as he, him; she, her; it. Before or
after a vowel, it may contract to l. Se pa li ki fè
sa It’s not he who did that. M’di li non I told him
no! Kisa li ye? What is it?
li 2
poss adj His, her, its. Kay li His house.
li 3
vt To read. SYLVAIN-3: Mwen konnen li I
know how to read. Moun ki pa konn li ni ekri
Illiterate.
lib attrib 1. Free. M’pa lib pou... I am not at
liberty to... Bay you rou lib To give someone a ride.
2. Unoccupied. 3. Loose (morally).
libera a n Libera*. Chant used in a church
service for the deceased.
liberal attrib Liberal*.
libète a n Liberty*, freedom.
libreri a n Bookstore, bookshop.
lide a, ide n Idea*, opinion, purpose, instinct.
Ide sa a pa bon This idea is not good. M’chanje
lide I changed my mind. Lide’m pa di’m... My
117 L
intuition (instinct) tells me not to... M’te fè lide
ale, men apre sa, m’deside rete At first I had the
intention to go, but, afterwards I decided to stay. Ki
lide ou? What’s your intention? What are you up
to? Sa pa vin nan lide’m It did not occur to me.
lidè a n Leader* (political).
lijyèn V ijyèn
likè a n Liqueur*. (fig) smooth.
likid 1
attrib Fluid. Ale likid To have diarrhea.
likid 2
la n Liquid*.
likidasyon an n Clearance sale. An likidasyon
On sale.
likide vt To liquidate*, to bargain away (to sell
at a lower price).
likoptè V elikoptè
likou a n Halter, leash (of dogs, etc.).
liks la n Luxury*.
lil V il
lilèt la n Small island. V il.
lim nan n File (tool).
limen 1
vt To file (with a tool).
limen 2
attrib Frayed. Vès la limen The jacket is
threadbare.
limen 3
vt To light, to ignite, to turn on, to
switch on. Limen chandèl dèyè you moun To jinx
someone.
limenm pers pron (He) himself, (she) herself,
itself. Li fè travay la limenm He did the work
himself.
limero V nimero
liminen vi To light a candle and pray.
limit la n Boundary, limit*.
limon 1
an n Moss.
limon 2
an n Sour lime*.
limonad la, limonnad n Lemonade*.
limoralite V imoralite
limyè a n Light, guiding light; flash. Se ou’k
limyè nou You are our guiding light.
lin 1
n Moon. Gen plenn lin aswè a There is full
moon tonight. V lalin.
lin 2
n Menstruation, menstrual period. Usually
règ.
lindemyèl la, lin de myèl la n Honeymoon.
linèt la n (Eye) glasses, spectacles. Monti linèt
Eyeglass frame. Vè linèt Lens (of eyeglasses). Linèt
solèy Sunglasses.
lis 1
attrib Smooth, polished. Planch la lis The
board is smooth.
lis 2
la n List*, register. Drese you lis To prepare a
list. Ou sou lis rate otobis la You are going to miss
your bus.
lisans la n 1. License*, permit (driver’s, hunting,
weapon, etc.). 2. Abuse of freedom.
lise 1
a n High school.
lise 2
vt To smooth.
lisifè n Lucifer*.
listre vt To polish, to shine (shoes).
listwa V istwa
lit 1
la, lalit n Struggle, fight.
lit 2
la n Liter*.
litani an n Litany*, refrain. You litani mo di A
long series of harsh words.
lite vi 1. To fight, to struggle. 2. To be reluctant,
to fight (mentally).
litlit adv Little* by little, without problem.
liv la n 1. Book. 2. Pound (weight).
livre vt To deliver*, to remit.
livrezon an n Delivery*. Y’ap fè livrezon mèb yo
demen They will deliver the furniture tomorrow.
liy nan n 1. Line*; style, stripe; fishing line;
clothes line. 2. Fè liy To court. M’te fè liy li I
courted her.
liyè a n Suitor (one who goes courting).
liyen vt 1. To wind. 2. To court ( a girl). 3. To
keep after, to go after anyone or anything. 4. To
sweet talk (anyone); to flatter. Examples and
expressions: Liyen topi To wind a top. L’ap liyen
djòb la He is going after that job. Ou pa bezwen
liyen’m, ou pap kenbe’m It’s no use watching me;
you’re not going to catch me.
liyorans V inyorans
lizay la, lizaj la n Manners, usage*. Fè lizay To
perform all of one’s duties toward someone or for
society. Yo te fin fè tout lizay nan kay la They had
already done all the household chores.
lizin V izin
lizyè a n Selvage, edge, border, boundary.
lo a n 1. Pile, batch, lot*. 2. Prize. Gro lo lotri a
First prize in a lottery.
lò 1
conj When, at the time when. Cf. lè, kon,
kan. Lò l’rive When he arrived. V lè.
lò 2
a, ò n Gold. You mont an ò A gold watch.
Pyès lò Gold coin.
lò 3
a V lè a
L 118
lobe Children’s game wherein the children splash
water. Tire lobe, bat lobe To splash water (game).
lobedyans la n Authority. Sou lobedyans Under
the authority of.
lòbèy la n Fuss(ing), problem(s), promiscuity.
Fè lòbèy To create fuss. Gen tròp lòbèy lan kay sa
a There’s too much promiscuousness in that house.
lòbidyèt la n Throat. Yo koupe lòbidyèt li They
cut his throat.
lobo a n Raucous, noise, discussion. V kabal,
eskandal, lòbèy. Gro lobo Big shot.
lòd la, zòd, òd n 1. Command, commandment;
order*. Bay lòd To order, to instruct, to command.
2. Discipline, order*.
lodè V odè
lodyans V odyans
lòfini V lèfini
lofis la n 1. Sideboard in which plates and glasses
are kept. 2. Small supply room, pantry.
lòj la n Loge* (box seats in a theater); lodge*
(of Freemasons).
lojman an n Lodging(s)*. Pran lojman To
secure lodgings. Bay you moun lojman To lodge*
someone.
lòk la n A strong medicine, laxative.
lokal la n Place, locale*.
lokatè a n Tenant, lessee.
lokazyon V okazyon
loke attrib Loony, crazy.
lokipasyon V okipasyon
loko attrib Crazy, mad, mentally deranged. Sp.
loco. Also Vodou term.
lokobe Bat lokobe To go through a rough time.
lokopèt la n Scandal monger, loudmouthed
person.
lolo vt To flatter, to cajole, to softsoap, to
wheedle.
lòlòj 1
la, lòlòy la, òlòj la n Clock. Lòlòj lakomin
Cityhall clock.
lòlòj 2
la, lòlòy la n Pa fatige lòlòj mwen Don’t
bug me. Let me be. Leave me alone. Yo te prèt pou
fin vire lòlòj li They almost made her crazy. Pèdi
lòlòy To lose one’s senses.
lòm, òm n Mankind, men. Tout òm se lòm
Every man is (to be treated as) a human being.
Reziyasyon fè lòm One must do what one has to do.
lòn V lonn
lonbraj la, lonbray n Shadow, shade. “Lonm”
is also used.
lonbrit la, nonbrit, lonbrik n Navel, belly button.
Ak ki sa yo te koupe lonbrit li? With what did they
cut his umbilical cord? V kòd (lonbrit).
long attrib Long*; slow. Li long nan tou sa l’ap fè
He is slow by nature in everything. Long kon (yon)
ke pis li tap tonbe lan trou a By a hair’s breadth he
missed falling into the hole.
longan an n Salve, ointment. Longan gri Gray
ointment. (A double pomade (mercury compound) to
kill crab lice).
longanis la n Type of large sausage.
longè a n Length*. Ou pa konn longè tigason sa a
You don’t know what that boy is capable of.
longvi a, lonnvi n Binoculars.
lonje 1
, alonje, ralonje vt To lengthen.
lonje 2
vt To stretch out, to reach. Lonje... bay
To hand, to pass. Lonje’l ban’m Pass it to me.
Mandyan lonje men yo pou mande charite Beggars
stretch out their hands to ask for alms. Lonje kò To
stretch out, to lounge. M’ap fè you ti lonje kò’m sou
gazon an I’m lying on the lawn for a while. Lonje
dyòl To pout. Lonje dwèt sou To point at.
lonm nan, onm n Shade, shadow.
lonmen V nonmen
lonn nan, lòn nan, òn n Haitian yard measure
(45”), ell*. Yon lonn, dezòn, twazòn, katr òn, senk
òn, etc. (fig) Yon lonn A lot of, much.
lonnen vt To measure by the ell. V lonn.
lontan adv A long time, for a long time, long*;
long ago, a long time* ago; much, by a long
shot, by far. Gen lontan de sa A long time ago.
Nan tan lontan A long, long time ago. Li gro
lontan pase ou He is much bigger than you. Ki pa
fèt lontan Recent.
lopital la, opital n Hospital*.
loraj la, loray n Thunder, storm. Tout moun di li
se loraj kale Everybody says she’s a terrible, scandalous,
bad woman.
lorye a n Oleander*.
lòryon an n Lorgnette*, monocle.
losti a, osti n Host* (consecrated wafer).
lostrogo a, ostrogo n Stupid dumbbell, ostrogoth*.
lòsyè You ti lòsyè A little something. Ban’m yon ti
lòsyè Give me a little bit.
losyon an n Perfume, lotion*. V pafen.
lòt 1
, dòt, lezòt indef adj Other*; else, next. De
lòt moun, de lezòt moun Two other persons. Dòt
fwa Sometimes, other times. Lòt kote Elsewhere,
somewhere else. You lòt bagay Something else.
lòt 2
indef pron Other* one, others*. Senk lòt yo
The five others.
119 M
lòt 3
Youn...lòt Each other*, one another. Youn tiye
lòt They killed each other.
lota a n Spot on the skin, skin sickness.
lòtbò, lòtbò a adv Yonder, over there, beyond.
Lòtbò dlo Abroad.
lote vt To divide into lots, piles.
lotè, lòtè n Cause, reason. Se ou ki lotè sa You
are responsible for that; you are the cause.
lotè V otè
lotèl 1
la n Altar*.
lotèl 2
V otèl
lotorite V otorite
lòtrejou The other day, recently.
lotri a n Raffle, lottery*.
lou 1
a n Wolf.
lou 2
attrib 1. Heavy. 2. Corpulent. Vin pi lou
To put on weight.
louch la n Ladle, dipper.
louchèt la n Spade. Iron bar, flat at one end,
used to dig holes in the ground.
loudo attrib Slow poke, straggler, lazy.
lougal A little bit, something; a little leeway.
(syn) lòsyè. Bay lougal To let (someone) off, give
him a respite, let him be.
lougarou a n Devil, werewolf*, sorcerer.
louk la n Swelling.
loulou 1
, loulout Dyòl loulou Really tasty. Lè ou
ap manje you mango ki dous, se dyòl loulou When
you are eating a sweet mango, it’s a delight.
loulou 2
a n Ti loulou lan vant Tenia, body worm,
tape worm.
louma a n Type of toy marble (game).
loup la n Magnifying glass (or) lens. 2. Blister
or scar following a contusion.
loupin nan n Loop* the loop (airplane acrobat-
ics).
louvri V ouvri
loveye vi To maneuver into the right position (a
ship).
lòyen vt To eye, to ogle, to squint (at).
lozèy la n Sorrel.
luil la, lwil n Oil*. Luil esansyèl Aromatic oil.
luilderisen an n Castor oil*.
luilfwadmori a n Cod liver oil*.
lwa a 1
n A god, divinity, spirit which possesses a
person during a Vodou ceremony. MORISSEAULEROY/D-30:
N’a sonnen ason pou rele lwa yo
We’ll ring the ‘ason’ to call the lwa. Manje lwa
The ensemble of Vodou service, plus the dancing
and eating. Gan lwa Ginen ak lwa kreyòl There
are African spirits and new world spirits. Lwa
zenga A deaf spirit (lwa), one without ears.
lwa 2
a, lalwa n Law*; Gospel. Gen lwa, gen lawa
To have the right (to), to be authorized (to).
lwanj la n Praise.
lwanje vt To praise.
lwanjè attrib Boastful.
lwaye a n Rent, the price of the room. Hire.
BEAUBRUN/A-22: Se mwen ki toujou peye lwaye
I’m the one that’s always paying the rent.
lwe vt To rent, to let, to lease, to freight.
lwen adv Remote, far, far off; far (from), far
away; away from base, i.e. absentminded(ly).
Lwen ak isit Far from here. Voye’l jete lwen ou
Throw it far away from you. Byen lwen, trè lwen
Very far, far out. Pi lwen Farther; beyond.
lwès, wès n West*.
lwido a n Type of bird (Euphonia musica).
lwijanboje n Quarrelsome person, one who wants
to have his way, someone who wants to be dicta-
torial.
lwil satan n Booze, alcoholic beverages.
lyan attrib Resilient, pliable, flexible.
lyann nan, lyàn n Creeper, liana* (a rope-like,
climbing plant or vine). There are many types
of lyann. “Lyann” also means “flexible”. Pran
lyann To go away, to disappear.
lye a n 1. League* (4 kilometers). 2. Place. Li
lan lye verite’l He is dead. Fè vizit de lye, fè desant
de lye To make a report in loco.
lyèj la n Cork. Bouchon lyèj Cork (top).
lyetnan an n Lieutenant*.
lyèv la n Hare.
lyon an n Lion*.
M
m 1
pers pron First person personal pronoun I,
me. Jodia m’rive ta Today I arrived late.
m 2
poss adj My. Kote chapo’m? Where is my hat?
ma 1
a n Residue, coffee grounds, sediment,
lees. Ma kafe Dregs. Kafe a gen ma ladan’l paske
li pa byen koule The coffee has dregs because it
hasn’t been properly filtered. Kafe’l koule ak ma
He’s in trouble.
M 120
ma 2
a n Mast*. Ma drapo Flagpole, flag mast,
flag staff.
ma 3
a n Puddle. Ma labou Mud puddle.
mab la n 1. Marble* (limestone). 2. Marble(s),
children’s game. Also called ’kannik’ (North).
mabi a n 1. Cheap, foamy beverage made from
the ‘mabi’ plant. 2. attrib Disturbed, troubled,
befuddled. Tèt mwen mabi I am troubled, I have
problems.
mabouya a n Tiny, lizard-like animal often seen
in and around stone walls, bigger than the ‘zandolit’
(V) but smaller than the ‘aganman’.
mabyal attrib Surly, grumpy; harsh.
mach la n 1. Walk, marching*; gait. 2. Step (of
a stair).
machal la n Blacksmith. Cf. E. marshall*.
machanday la n Bargaining.
machande vt To bargain, to barter. Lò ou ap
achte se pou ou machande When buying you must
bargain. Lò you gason enfim san kòb, fanm pa
machande li When a man is sick and broke, women
don’t fool with him.
machandiz la n Merchandise*.
machann nan, manchann n Merchant* woman,
merchant*, vender, vendor. Ti machann kasav la
The cassava saleswoman. Machann sirèt Candy
vender. Machann lèt Dairymaid. Machann dezagreman
Quarrelsome person.
mache 1
a n Market*. Ale nan mache To go to the
market. Mache an fè The big iron-market in downtown
Port-au-Prince. Bon mache Cheap.
mache 2
vi 1. To walk. Mache bwate To limp.
Mache pale you moun mal To go around speaking
evil about someone. Mache pi dousman pou ou pa
bouke Walk more slowly, or you’re going to get
tired. Mache ansanm a. To match. b. To walk
together. 2. To work (function). 3. To get ahead.
4. To march* along. 5. To work out (to go
well). 6. To go along, to agree, to get along.
mache 3
vt To chew, to masticate*.
machè My dear (when talking to a female).
machin nan n 1. Machine*; implement, engine.
2. Auto, car. M’pa gan machin I don’t have a car.
machinaekri a n Typewriter.
machinakoud la, machin nan n Sewing machine.
machòkèt la, machoukèt la n Blacksmith, tinker,
potter. Anyone not skilled in the use of the
tools of the trade.
machonnen vt To munch. Ou ap machonnen
manje a nan bouch ou You’re chewing your food in
your mouth.
machpye a n Stoop, steps to the house, running
board of a car, runway.
machwa a, machwè n Jaw. Bann machwa A chin
band. (A brace or strap extending from the neck to
the jaw used to keep the mouth closed. It is also
used on corpses whenever the jaws won’t stay closed).
madam V madanm
madan 1
n Mrs. (must be followed by a noun).
Madan Pòl Mrs. Paul. Madan mango Type of
large tomb shaped like a chapel. V madanm.
madan 2
sara a, madansara a n 1. Small, yellowish
and black and green bird that is constantly chirping.
These birds build their nest almost anywhere
and can cause havoc in rice fields. Ploceus
cucullatus. 2. A talkative woman. Usually refers
to travelling merchant women who go from one
town to another to buy and sell, generally in
trucks and usually gabbing.
madan 3
yass, madanyas n Jerusalem thorn.
Parkinsonia aculeata L.
madanm nan, madam nan n 1. Wife, mate.
2. Woman, lady. “Madanm” and “madam” are
also used in the vocative, in which case no article
is used. Examples: Madanm Pòl mouri Paul’s
wife died. Madanm nan te gen you rad nwa The
lady wore a black dress. Bonjou, madanm Good
morning, ma’am*.
madi n Tuesday.
madichon an, malediksyon n Curse, malediction*,
bad luck. MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-7: Gen you
malediksyon k’ap pousuiv fanmi an There’s a curse
that’s haunting that family. Granmoun nan ap ba
ou madichon si ou derespekte’l The old man will
cast a curse upon you, if you don’t respect him.
madichonnen vt To curse.
madigra a n 1. Mardigras*. Bann madigra Carnival
group. Twa jou madigra The last three days of
Carnival, just before Ash Wednesday. 2. A masked
person in a carnival parade, masquerade. 3. (fig)
A person with too much make-up, and/or poorly
matched clothing. Li gen tèt madigra He looks
very ugly, horrible, with non-matching clothes.
madivin nan n Lesbianism. Cf. masisi. Fè
madivin To practice lesbianism. V madivinèz.
madivinèz la, madivin nan n Lesbian.
madlèn n Type of snake.
madmwazèl la, matmwazèl la n Girl, young
woman; Miss. V manmzèl, manzè.
madoda a n Homosexual.
madoken an n Earthen cook pot.
madou a n An item that is illegally placed at the
bottom of a container so that the content will
be less than the regular legal capacity (pound,
gallon, etc.)
madougoun nan n Hernia, hydrocele. Cf. mak-
louklou.
121 M
madoulè attrib Huge and ugly. Sèkèy madoulè A
heavy, rough casket to bury an indigent person.
madra a n Kerchief for the head.
madre, madwe attrib Cunning, clever, tricky.
Tousen Louvèti te nèg madwe Toussaint Louverture
was a very cunning man.
madriye a n Block of wood, beam.
maestro a, mayestro n Head of a musical ensemble.
Maestro*.
mafi My child (used when talking to a young
woman).
mafweze, mafwezi, mafreze attrib Very ugly,
cripple, disfigured.
mafya a n 1. Gangster. 2. Mafia*.
magazen an n Shop, store. Cf. E. Magazine*,
world-wide Venetianism; later a Gallicism in Italy.
magoul la, magoulèt la n Double chin. V majòl,
bajou.
magouy la n Trick(s), scheme.
magouyè a n Trickster, schemer.
magre V malgre
magrit 1
la n Marguerite* (flower).
magrit 2
la n Angelfish.
majè attrib Of age, older.
maji a n Magic*.
majigridi a, jigridi a n Scribbling, doodling.
majistra a n 1. Magistrate*. 2. Mayor. Also
majistra kominal.
majò a n Major*. 2. Type of sugar cane.
majòjon an n Drum major*, baton twirler. “Batonthrower
of the Rara troup (COURLANDER).
majòl la, majò a n Double chin. V magoul,
bajou.
majolèn nan, majolenn nan n Wild thyme, sweet
Marjorum* (rare). Also: double chin. V ten.
majorite a n Majority*. An majorite In the
majority.
mak la n Mark*, sign, type; brand, trademark;
scar. Pote mak To bear a scar. Scoreboard (in
card games). Portion (marked by the seller).
makak la n 1. Macaco*, ape, monkey. Fè makak
To clown. Ti nèg sa a toujou ap fè makak The
little boy is always clowning, and making faces.
Mal makak Hangover. 2. Big stick, club, cudgel.
Jandam nan simen makak sou volè a Using his
club, the policeman showered the thief with blows.
makakri a n Monkeyshines, stupidity, foolishness.
makanda a n Werewolf. “A specific kind of
aggressive magic” (COURLANDER). Also applies
to an awkward and ugly person.
makaron V maskaron
makaroni an n Macaroni*.
make vt To mark*, to notice, to leave a mark, to
put down (to write down). Make konpa To
mark time (in a dance rhythm). Make pa To keep
(mark) time, to keep in step.
makèt la n Supermarket* (generally a large grocery
store).
makiye vi To make up (face). Li makiye tankou
madigra His bad makeup makes him look like a
Carnival type.
makiyon an n Expert rider, trainer, horse-dealer.
maklouklou a, makouklou, makoukou n Hydrocele,
hernia. Also madougoun.
makoklen an n Sissy, homosexual.
makòmè 1
a, gason makòmè n Sissy, homosexual,
or simply one who behaves like a woman.
makòmè 2
V kòmè
makòn nan, makonn nan n Bundle, herd, flock.
Yon makòn poul A lot of hens.
makònaj la, makònay la n Entanglement, togetherness,
mixing.
makònen, makonnen vt To tie together (by the
horns). To tangle, to entangle, to lock horns
(steers).
makonmè V kòmè
makou a, matou a n Tom-cat, thief. Makou chat
Big tom-cat; thief. V chat.
makoubi attrib Deformed, in bad shape, ugly.
makout 1
la n 1. Sort of basket made of woven
grass, and used for carrying all kinds of articles.
It is strapped to the shoulders. 2. Saddle bag,
pack saddle. V chay, dyakout.
makout 2
V tonton makout
makouti a n A small “makout” (bag).
makrèl la n Procuress, procurer. Kay makrèl
House where you bring a woman and pay for the use
of a room.
makrèy, krèy Yon makrèy (or) Yon krèy A lot of, a
bunch of, a pile of. Yon krèy timoun A lot of
children.
makro a, makriyo a n Mackerel*; procurer (rare).
V makrèl.
makwali, makwal attrib Inelegant(ly), awkward,
unrefined, clumsy. One who doesn’t wear his
clothes properly.
mal 1
la n 1. Male*. 2. Huge, immense. Yon mal
kay A very big house.
M 122
mal 2
la n Trunk (luggage), suitcase.
mal 3
, lemal n Evil; harm. Fè yon moun mal To
cast a spell on s.o.
mal 4
la n Ache, pain; sickness. Fè mal To hurt.
Maldemè Seasickness. Mal damou Love sickness.
Malozye Conjunctivitis. Maltèt Headache. Vantfèmal
Bellyache. Maldanfan Labor pain(s). Lè ou
lan mal ou lan mal nèt Once you have problems you
are really in trouble.
mal 5
attrib 1. Sick, in bad shape. Li byen mal,
l’ap mouri He is very sick; he is dying. 2. Clumsy,
ignorant. Mal pou Hard to, reluctant to. Li mal
pou reveye It’s hard for him to wake up. Moun pa
mal pou mouri People die so easily. Malè pa mal
Misfortune strikes so easily. 3. Badly, poorly, improperly,
wrong. Mal fèt Sloppy, poorly made.
Pale yon moun mal To speak evil of s.o. Malelve
Ill-bred.
malad attrib & n Sick. Patient, sick person. Gen
you salamanje pou doktè yo, ak you lòt pou malad
yo There is a dining room for physicians, and a
separate one for the patients. Li malad pou mouri
He is moribund. Ou ap mande si malad vle bwè
bouyon! You’re asking if a sick person wants to
drink broth! (He won’t say no to that. It’s so good,
there’s no way to refuse it).
maladi a n Sickness, disease, illness. Lafyèv se
pa maladi, se jalouzi ki maladi Fever is not a
sickness; but jealousy is. Maladi tonbe Epilepsy.
Maladi pwatrin Tuberculosis.
maladrès la n Lack of skill, awkwardness.
maladwa attrib Awkward.
malagèt la n Guinea-pepper, Pimenta officinalis
Lindl.
malagòch attrib Clumsy, awkward.
malaka a n Musical instrument. Maraca*.
malandouran, malandiran attrib Ill-bred, crude;
weak, listless, unstable.
malandren an n Bandit, bum, wrongdoer, widespread
Neapolitanism. Li pito renmen ak malandren
pase li rete avè’m She prefers to love a vagabond
bum rather than stay with me.
malanga a n Taro (edible tuber) Colocassia
xanthosoma P. In the South, they use the word
“tayo” instead of “malanga”.
malantandi a n Misunderstanding.
malapri attrib Li pa malelve, li malapri He was
not improperly reared; he just wouldn’t learn.
malaria a n Malaria*. Cf. lafyèv.
malatchonn, malatchong n Junk, worthless object,
something of inferior quality.
malchans la n Bad luck.
maldamou, mal damou n Lovesickness.
maldan an, mal dan an n Toothache. (Popular
usage prefers ‘moldan’).
maldanfan n Labor pain, travail. An maldanfan
In labor.
maldòn Misunderstanding. Gen maldòn There’s
a misunderstanding. Something is wrong.
maldyòk la n The evil eye, evil spell, malocchio.
(Knock on wood). Ou a ba’l maldyòk You’ll
give him the evil eye. Grenn maldyòk A seed on a
string (kolye) placed around the neck of a child to
keep away the evil eye. V pwa maldyòk.
maldyoke, dyoke vt To cast a curse on someone,
to wish an illness or calamity on someone.
malè a n Misfortune, woe, catastrophe, accident,
bad luck, calamity. Malè pa mal A mishap can
easily occur.
malediksyon an n Curse.
malediksyonnen vt To curse.
malefis la n Evil spell, malefice*.
malelve, maledve, mal leve attrib Ill-bred, illmannered,
rude, impolite, discourteous. V mal-
apri.
malen attrib Astute, clever, sagacious, shrewd,
sly, artful, cunning, one who is not easily caught.
maleng nan n Sore, ulcer, malignant* wound.
V bouton, kalmason.
malenge attrib Afflicted with many sores.
malere attrib & n Poor, unfortunate, povertystricken,
unhappy, miserable, penniless, pauper.
malèrèz attrib & n Poor, wretched. (Applied to
female beings).
malerezman adv Unfortunately.
malesite a, malsite a n Abject misery, poverty.
Li te nan malsite He was in dire straits.
malèt la n Small trunk, valise, suitcase. M’ap fè
malèt mwen I am packing.
malfetè a, malfektè a n Villain, criminal, evildoer;
malefactor*.
malfezan attrib Nasty, evil, harmful, wicked; mischievous.
Li fè’m malfezan He played a dirty trick
on me. n Evildoer.
malfini an n Hawk, chicken hawk, vulture, bird
of prey.
malfouti attrib Ugly, badly shaped, deformed
(person); badly dressed.
malgòj la n Sore throat.
malgre 1
, magre prep In spite of; despite. Malgre
tou sa m’fè pou ou After all I have done for you.
malgre 2
, magre conj Although. Malgre li te
malad Although he was sick.
123 M
malisyòs attrib Deceitful, malevolent, malicious*.
malkadi a n Epilepsy. Pòm malkadi A small
fruit.
malmakak la, mal makak la n Hangover.
malman adv Badly. Li pale angle malman He
speaks English with difficulty.
malmennen vt To rough up, to treat roughly.
malmouton an n Mumps.
maloblijan attrib Not (very) obliging*. Tigason
sa a maloblijan, li pa rann moun sèvis That boy is
not very obliging; he’ll never do you a favor.
malocho attrib Clumsy, gruff.
malonèt, malonnèt attrib Dishonest*, unkind,
crook, unobliging, impolite, unfair, dishonorable.
Fè malonèt To be very discourteous, to give a
cool reception to someone; to rebuff.
malonnètte a, malonnèkte a n Affront. Fè malonnètte
To make an affront.
malouk attrib 1. Rough, repulsive, brutal. Said
of an unapproachable, difficult person who is
of a bad humor; amè, but “amè” is said of a
person who is in a bad humor temporarily.
2. Sloppy, badly made. Lapli a tonbe semèn sa a,
rout la malouk It rained this week and the road is
in bad shape. < Sp maluco.
malozye a n Sickness in the eyes, conjunctivitis,
pink-eye.
malpalan attrib Slanderous, disparaging (person).
malpròp attrib Messy, sloppy, dirty, filthy, dishonest.
Ala fi malpròp! What a slut! Malpròp kon
kochon Sloppy as a pig.
malpròpte a n Filth.
malsite V malesite
malswenan n 1. Sea hog. 2. Sickly person.
maltaye attrib Badly-made. You kostim maltaye
A badly tailored suit. Fè yon kont maltaye To make
a private arrangement; trade off. (A take-off from
Fr cote mal taillée)
maltchò n Evil, heartless person.
maltèt la, malotèt n Headache. Also tètfèmal.
maltrete vt To mistreat, to maltreat*.
malveyan attrib Wicked, rascally, malevolent*,
spiteful. DEJEAN-68: Ala domestik malveyan What
a wicked servant.
malveyans la n Malevolence*.
malvini attrib Rachitic, stunted, underdeveloped,
puny.
mamay la, manmay, maymay n Kids, children.
mamè V mè
mamit la n Tin can, pot, kettle; measuring can.
“Kanistè” in the North.
mamonnen vi To mumble.
mamòte, manmòte vi To mumble, to speak
hesitantly.
man n Short for ‘manman’ (Mom*). Used only
pretonically.
manadjè a n Boss, manager*.
manba a n Peanut butter.
manbo a n Vodou priestess.
manbre attrib Strong, robust, solid. Macho. Li
byen manbre He has a big organ; he is well-endowed.
manch la n Handle, stem; sleeve, wing. Manch
pilon Stamper, pestle. Manch pip Pipe stem.
manche, manchte vt To grab by the handle; to
provide with a handle; to put a handle to (a
tool, etc.). Li manche plim li pou’l ekri He
grabbed his pen to write. Nonm sa a byen manche
This man has a big dick. CELESTIN-MEGIE/1-173:
Tanbouye yo manchte bagèt yo.
manchèt la n 1. Machete*. Pou koupe kann ou
bezwen manchèt You need a machete to cut sugar
cane. 2. Male sexual organ. 3. Cuff. 4. Type of
fish (Trichiurius Lepturus).
manchte V manche
manda a n Mandate*, written authorization; citation
to court, subpoena, warrant.
mandarin nan n Tangerine.
mandate vt To empower, to authorize (legally).
mande vt 1. To ask, to request, to beg, to inquire;
to require. 2. To wonder. 3. To charge. Examples
and expressions: Mande you travay To apply
for a job. Konbyen ou mande pou sa? How much do
you charge for that? M’ap mande’m sa’l vle I
wonder what he wants. Mande pou To ask for. Li
te mande anraje He was furious.
mandrinen vt To crush, to smash, to gnaw.
mandyan an n Beggar, mendicant*.
mandyannen vi To beg, to ask for alms.
mandyansite a n Begging. Se devan legliz la l’ap
fè mandyansite He is begging in front of the church.
manèv la, mannèv la n 1. Maneuver*. 2. Helper.
manfouben attrib Lazy, carefree, careless, lethargic,
inconsiderate, negligent.
mang nan n Mangrove*. There are white, black,
and red varieties.
mango a n Mango*. Mangifera indica L. Varieties
of mangoes: fransik, kòn, kannèl, blan, fil, kòdòk,
rozali, batis, kakòn, miska, etc.
M 124
mangonmen, mongonmen vi To become complicated,
entangled, involved. Bagay la mangonmen
The situation has become critical.
mangousa a n A badly dressed person.
mangouyan attrib Lame, with distorted body,
ugly.
mani an n Bad habit, craze, mania*. Li gen mani
bwè tròp dlo lè l’ap manje He has the habit of
drinking too much water when he’s eating.
maniboula a, manouba, manniboula n Musical
instrument.
manigans la n Bad trick, connivance, tricky ways
used to obtain one’s goal. Li fè tout vye manigans
pou’l gen promosyon He is using all kinds of
devious tricks to gain his promotion.
maniganse vt To plot, to scheme, to contrive
(something). Li maniganse tròp move zafè; li fini
pa pran prizon By plotting so many underhanded
deals he ended up in prison. vi Maniganse kont...
To plot against...
manigèt V mannigèt
manje a n Food, nourishment, meal, dish, dinner,
feed (animals). Manje lwa A feast for one or
more loas. Manje marasa Feast for twins. Manje
mò Feast for the dead. Manje kuit Cooked (prepared)
food. (fig) Li renmen manje tou kuit He wants his
(anything) already prepared for him. (fig) Li manje
manje bliye He is very forgetful, ungrateful. Manje
maten Breakfast. Also dejene, dejnen. Manje
midi Lunch. Manje aswè Dinner. (Also “soupe”)
Supper.
manje vt 1. To eat. Manje sote To eat sparingly,
poorly, to eat one day and skip the next because of
poverty. L’ap manje mizè He is so poor. Blesi a ap
manje’m The wound is “eating” me (is hurting
badly). Manje dan To grind one’s teeth. 2. (fig)
To destroy. To hurt (s.o.).
manjè a n Eater, one who eats a great deal.
Msye se gran manjè, li pa vle travay The gentleman
is a big eater; he won’t work.
manjèdkòd n Loose woman, bitch.
mank la n 1. Lack. 2. Blunder, mistake. 3. San
mank Absolutely, without fail. Sou mank Ready to
take advantage of any opportunity (pej). Mank
dega Lack of respect.
manke 1
vt To lack, to miss, to run short of; to
barely miss, to almost miss. Nan jwe, mwen
manke kase janm li During a game, I almost broke
his leg. Kafe ou te ban mwen an te manke dous
The coffee you have given me didn’t have enough
sugar. Manke dega To disrespect. Manke yon fèy
To have a screw loose. Sèvyèt la lave, men li manke
pròp The towel has been washed but it’s not completely
clean. Ou manke sou gason ou You’re not man
enough.
manke 2
vi To be missing, to be lacking.
mànken an, mannken an n Model (woman);
dummy, plastic manikin*, mannequin*.
manm nan n Limb, member*. Ou pa gen manm,
ou pa manbre. You are not strong. You manm
initil A useless person.
manman1
an n 1. Mother, mama*, parent. 2. Female.
Examples and expressions: Manman bèf
Cow. Manman bourik She-ass. Manman kabrit
Nanny goat. Manman chat Pussy cat, thief (female).
Manman chen Bitch, female dog. Manman kochon
Sow. Manman lajan The principal (capital earning
interest), main portion, bulk. Manman pans Stomach
of a ruminant. Manman pitit Mother. Manman
poul Hen. (fig) Huge, immense. Yon manman
kanson Pants that are too big.
manman 2
penba a n 1. Sly, malicious woman.
2. The largest cannon of the “Citadel”. 3. (fig)
Someone’s defense and strength. M’a lage manman
penba’m sou ou I will blast you.
manmèl la n Teat, udder. V tete. Gro manmèl
Big bosom, no longer beautiful.
manmit n Mommy* (endearing term for mother).
Sp. Mamita.
manmòte V mamòte
manmzèl la n Girl, young woman (usually pej).
mannan attrib (usu) Blan mannan Poor, wretched,
worthless, white person. Also blan poban.
mannèv la, manèv la n Maneuver*. Helper in
construction work.
manniba V marimba
mannigèt la, manigèt la n Influence, trump,
maneuvering; a good word. Fè mannigèt To play
one’s trump cards. i.e. To do one’s best, to
make use of one’s assets to achieve a goal. V pis-
ton.
mannivèl la, manivèl la n (Automobile crank)
handle; any handle used to make a circular move-
ment.
mannyè V mànyè
manpenba a n 1. Type of drum. 2. Fat, plump.
manseniye a n Florida poison tree. Metopium
toxiferum (L) Krug and Urban.
mant la n Mint* (herb).
mantè a, mantò a n Liar.
mantèg la, mantèk la n Lard. Cooking grease.
V bè.
mantèz la n Liar. Used with (fem) beings.
manti 1
a n Falsehood, lie. Fè manti (or) bay
manti To tell a falsehood, to lie. Fè fo manti To
tell a bad lie. Si ou fè fo manti sou mwen, m’ap tiye
ou If you fabricate stories (lies) about me, I’ll kill
you.
manti 2
vi To lie, to tell a falsehood.
125 M
mantiy la, manti a n Mantilla*.
manto a n Coat.
mantò a n 1. Lie, falsehood. 2. Liar.
manton an n Chin.
mànyak attrib One who has set ways. Eccentric,
peculiarly settled in one’s ways.
mànyè a, mannyè a n Manner*. Li gen move
mànyè He has bad manners. Se pa la mànyè It’s
not the proper way. This is not proper (right). Li
san mannyè He has no manners.
manyè adv A little, somewhat; fairly, more or
less. (It mitigates and renders friendlier and
kindlier that which follows). Li manyè sou He is
slightly drunk. Manyè manje Eat a little. Come
on. Force yourself to eat something. Chen an pa fin
avèg nèt; li manyè wè The dog is not completely
blind; he can see a little.
manyen vt 1. To feel, to touch, to handle; to
manipulate. Pa manyen’m, men ou sal Don’t
touch me; your hands are dirty (soiled). 2. To do
harm to someone by slandering or hexing him.
Y’ap manyen nèg la They are causing problems for
that man.
mànyezi a n Milk of Magnesia*. Also lèt mànyezi.
mànyifik attrib Splendid, grand, magnificent*,
fine.
manyòk la n Manioc*, cassava. Manyòk anmè
is the poisonous variety. Manyòk dous is the
edible variety. Rache manyòk nou, bay tè a blanch
Go away, clear the land. (Bishop Romelus, 1987).
manzè n 1. Ms., Miss (title). Manzè Mariz
V Madmwazèl. 2. Mrs. (used when addressing
concubines). Cf. plasay.
mapotcho 1
a, mapotyo n Large fish which is
also called kana or wodo.
mapotcho 2
, mapotyo n Of huge stature, obese,
fat person. Fanm zanmi’m se you mapotyo My
friend’s wife is huge.
mapou a n Ceiba, (silk) cotton tree. Ceiba
pentandra L.
mapyang Wanderer, good-for-nothing. Bouke mache
tou patou kon yon mapyang Stop wandering
around.
marabou n Person of mixed blood with smooth,
brown skin and straight hair.
marande vt To tangle, to entangle; to be tied
together.
marasa a, masa a n Twins.
mare vt 1. To tie, to bind, to strap, to fasten, to
attach, to secure. 2. To put a jinx (on). 3. Tied
up, embarrassed, clumsy; overcast (sky). Examples
and expressions: Mare yo pakèt pa pakèt
Tie them in bundles. An nou mare’l Let’s put a
jinx on him. An’n mare lapli a Let us put a hex on
the rain (to prevent it from starting (or) to stop
it). (fig) Mare men (or) mare pye To hinder.
Li mare kon you krab He is dumb struck, embarrassed.
Mare lwa To tie (i.e. to hex) a loa, to prevent him
from entering one’s head (COURLANDER). Fanm
nan mare msye, li pa fouti kite’l That woman
charmed that man, he just can’t leave her. Mare
twa pli nan fron To frown, showing hostility. Mare
min (or) mare figi To frown. Tan an mare jodi
a It looks like rain. Se pou tout manman pitit mare
vant yo Every mother must prepare herself for the
worst. (tighten her belt and make sacrifices,
resign herself).
marekay la, marekaj la n Swamp.
marèl la n Hopscotch.
maren an n Sailor, marine*. Ble maren Navy
blue.
marèn V marenn
marengwen an, mayengwen n Gnat, mosquitoes.
Marengwen jwenn van, l’al Lagonav That person
took advantage of the situation. Tanbou marengwen
String musical instrument (rudimentary type).
marenn nan, marèn n Godmother. Marèn nòs
Maid of honor.
mari a n Husband, spouse, mate. Also msye
marye.
marimba a, malimba, manimba, manniba n Popular
musical instrument, marimba*.
marinad la n Batter, pancake, fritter made of
flour, pork, salt, vinegar, hot pepper, thyme and
other spices. Nadmarinad Nothing at all, zilch.
marinen vi To marinate* (culin). To tangle up.
marinèt pye chèch n Vodou spirit.
maro a n Mahoe*. Maro fran Mahoe, sea hibiscus.
maroday la n Looting, theft, marauding*.
marodè a n Looter, thief, marauder*.
marodèm, mahodenm, marodenm nan n Kapok.
(Ochroma pyramidalis Kapoc). Also called koton
flè.
maroka a, mayoka a n Caterpillar.
maron1
n (light) Brown.
maron 2
attrib Wild, undomesticated; runaway,
used to describe one who stays away from a
place where he used to go. Chat maron Wild
cat, as contrasted with chat kay Domestic cat,
house cat. Nèg maron Runaway slave, maroon*.
Zèb maron Wild plants (grass). Bal maron Stray
bullet. Li lan maron He took to the woods.
maron 3
vt To run away (from), to evade, to stay
away (from), to keep away (from). Depi apre
kal la, li maron kay la; li pa janm tounen After
that beating, he ran away and never returned to
that house. Pyè maron pou Jozèf Peter is keeping
away from Joseph.
M 126
maronnay la n Running away.
maronnen vi To entangle, to become entangled.
maronyè a n Looter, marauder.
maronyen vi To maraud.
maroule a n 1. Herdsman, one who drives cattle
to the slaughterhouse. 2. Filthy person who sleeps
outside, anywhere.
maryaj la, maryay la n Marriage*, wedding feast.
Maryaj sivil Civil marriage.
marye, maye vi To wed, to get married, to
marry*. Edip te marye ak manman’l King Oedipus
was married to his mother. A midi tanbou marye,
abitan pran danse At noon the drums started; people
began to dance. Marye sivil To get married with a
civil ceremony but not in a church.
mas 1
la n Mask*.
mas2
la n Sledge hammer. Cf. E. Mace*.
mas 3
la n People who inhabit the poor inner
cities; mass*, as opposed to the élite.
mas 4
la n Mass* (solid). Fè mas ak To associate
with. Yon mas A lot of, many. Yon mas lajan A
lot of money.
mas 5
n March*.
masaj la, masay n Massage*.
masak la n Massacre*, slaughter (of people).
masakre vt To massacre*, to butcher, to murder.
Kwafè a masakre’m jodi a The barber ruined me
today (my hair).
masif attrib Big, stout, full, heavy, thick; solid,
substantial, massive*; heavy-set. 2. Gross, rough.
V mastòk.
masisi a n Homosexual, “gay”, faggot, fag.
maskarad la n Hypocrisy, mascarade*.
maskaron an, makaron an n Grotesque figure.
Baka makaron Very ugly werewolf.
maskay An maskay Secretly, furtively.
maske vi To disguise, to mask* one’s self. Bal
maske Masquerade*.
maskriti a, maskreti a n Palm-oil plant, castor-oil
plant. Also Palmaskriti. Lè moun gen lafyèv, yo
chofe luil maskriti ak sèl; yo ba yo friksyon When a
person has a fever, they heat (castor) oil with salt
and rub it on his body.
mason an n 1. Bricklayer, mason*. Bos mason
(Master) bricklayer; workman above apprentice,
handyman. 2. Freemason*, freemasonry*.
masonn nan n Stucco, mortar (mix), masonry*.
masonnen vt To mason*, to plaster.
masonnri a n Masonry* work.
maspinen vt To mistreat, to abuse, to crush.
mastik la n (Roof) coating, putty, mastic*. Do
kay la koule, se pou yo mete mastik sou li The roof
is leaking; they’ll have to coat it.
mastike vt To putty.
mastòk attrib Bulky, rugged, heavy, crude, lumpy;
clumsy, not refined. V masif.
maswife a, masuife a n Greasy pole (at a public
celebration) (e.g. on Jan. 1, Independence day).
Chak premye janvye, toujou gen maswife sou
Channmas On January 1, there is always a greasy
pole at the Champ de Mars.
matadò, matadòl attrib Killer. Kòk matadò Killer
game cock. Sp. matador.
matant V tant
match la n Game, match*.
matchak la n Filth, mud, bad mixture.
matchaka a, tchaka a n Anything crushed together.
V tchaka.
matcho a n Ladies’ man, macho*, Don Juan.
mate 1
vt To curb, to harness, to hold down, to
subdue. M’ap mate’l I’ll set him straight.
mate 2
vi To protrude, to bounce. Boul la mate
The ball bounced.
matematik la n Mathematics*.
maten an n Morning. You bon maten, yo tap
manje. Very early in the morning, they were eating.
Granm maten At dawn. Di maten a.m. Pi bonè se
granm maten The best time is now.
materyèl attrib Gross, materialistic*.
materyo a n (Building) material(s)*.
mati a n Misery, painful situation; torture; martyrdom*.
Mari’l tap fè’l pase mati Her husband
really made her suffer. He was continually making
her suffer. Li mouri mati He suffered martyrdom.
matinal attrib Early rising.
matine a n Morning, forenoon.
matinèt la n Cat-o’-nine-tails, whip with three
pieces of leather at the end. V rigwaz.
matirize vt To torture, to treat cruelly, to mistreat,
to martyr*.
matla a n Mattress*.
matlasye a n Mattress*-maker. Also fezè matla.
matlo a n Sailor.
matlòt la n Rival (woman who is the rival of
another woman, only where a man is concerned).
matmwazèl V madmwazèl
mato a n Hammer. Tèt mato Dumbell; novice,
awkward, unskilled person.
maton attrib Adroit; skilled at shooting marbles.
127 M
matoral la n Prairie.
matou V makou
matris la n Womb.
matyè a n Matter*; purulent matter; fecal matter.
may la n Link in a chain.
mayas Santi mayas To have a disagreeable odor
(feet).
mayengwen V marengwen
mayestro a V maestro
mayèt la n 1. Mallet*. 2. Clout, blow. 3. Authority,
power. Mayèt la nan men ou The matter now is in
your hands; it’s up to you.
mayetizè a n Hypnotist.
mayi a n Corn, maize*. Mayi moulen Ground
corn, cornmeal, mush, polenta. Mayi ole Fresh
tender corn. Mayizena Corn flour. Mayi diven
Violet colored corn (North). Pye mayi Corn stalk.
Pèpèt mayi Pop corn.
mayilò a, maylo n Game in which a child pivots
around.
maymay la V mamay
mayo a n Teeshirt, jersey, sweater, polo shirt;
swimsuit (Also mayodben). A special shirt
worn to counteract the evil eye or some other
magic (COURLANDER).
mayodben an n Swimsuit, bathing suit.
mayoka V maroka
mayonèz la n Mayonnaise*,
mayoyo a n Stupid ass, dumbell. One who
can’t see beyond his nose. Mayoyo egare A
bewildered fool.
mazenflen an n 1. A person with a large belly.
2. A worthless person. (syn) babouzi.
mazenga a n Peasants’ work bee. Cf. koumbit.
mazèt attrib Awkward person, novice; unskilled,
one who misses. Avoka mazèt Unskilled lawyer.
mazi a n Hovel, shanty.
mazonbèl la, mazoumbèl n Type of root vegetable.
mazonnen vt To deceive.
mazora attrib Applied to persons whose front
teeth are missing; ugly person.
me n May*.
mè a, mamè n Nun, mother, sister (Religious)).
Also Sè. Antre nan mè To go into a convent.
mèb la n Furniture.
meble vt To furnish.
mèch la n Wick (of a lamp), lock (of hair); bit
(of drill), drill.
mechan, michan attrib Wicked, bad, evil, cruel,
mean, ruthless, vicious, furious.
mechanste a n Naughtiness, wickedness, something
wicked. Pa mechanste Out of meanness. Se
mechanste That’s mean.
mèd V lanmèd
medam n Ladies, women.
meday la n Medal*.
medaye vt To award a medal*.
medi vi To speak evil of. Ou ap medi de mwen
You said bad things about me.
medikaman an n Medicine, remedy prepared in
drugstore. Medicament*.
medizan attrib Slanderer, slanderous (person),
backbiting. Chak jou yo fè medizan sou do’m Every
day they speak evil of me behind my back. V malpalan.
medizans la n Slander, calumny.
medsin 1
nan, metsin, mestin n (Medicine* used
as a) laxative. Cf. E. I took some medicine*
(laxative) for my stomach. (Used particularly
by farmers).
medsin 2
, lamedsin n Medical sciences, medicine*.
Lekòl de medsin Medical school.
medsiyen an, metsiyen, mesiyen n Castor oil
plant (medicinal plant). Jatropa gossypifolia L.
medyòm nan n Medium* (spiritual).
mefyan, demefyan attrib Distrustful, mistrustful.
mefye vt To distrust, to be suspicious of.
mèg attrib Thin, skinny, lean, emaciated. Cf. E.
Meager*. Fè mèg To fast. Mèg kon kas; mèg kon
taso Thin as a leaf.
megri vi To become thin, lean, meager*. To
lose weight.
mekanik la n Mechanics*.
mekanisyen an n Mechanic*.
mèkirokòm nan n Mercurochrome*.
mekontan attrib Displeased, dissatisfied, unhappy,
malcontent*.
mekontantman an n Dissatisfaction.
mèkredi n Wednesday. Mèkredi lèsann. Ash
Wednesday.
mekreyan attrib Unbeliever, atheist.
mèl 1
la n Whetstone, grindstone.
mèl 2
la n Blackbird (Quiscalus niger).
mèl 3
A variant of “mele” in the expression “Ki
mèl mwen? (or) Ki mele mwen?” I don’t care.
melanj la n Mix, blend, mixture. Pa fè melanj
Don’t mix your drinks.
M 128
melanje vt To blend, to mix, to mingle; to
confuse.
melas la n Cheap beverage made from sugarcane.
Molasses*.
mele vt To mingle, to mix, to confuse, to entangle,
to mix up; to be confused, embarrassed, awkward;
to be concerned with, to have to do with. vi
To interfere, to meddle with. Examples and
expressions: Kòd yo te mele The ropes were entangled.
Nonm nan mele kon you krab The man is all
mixed up like a crab. Ki mele’m I don’t care, it’s
not my concern. Who cares? Pa mele nan sa Don’t
meddle in that.
melè a n Deceiver.
melimelo a n Pawnshop; junkshop, bric a brac
(store); troublesome situation particularly under
promiscuous circumstances, mess.
melis la n Balm (plant).
melon an n Melon*. Melon Frans Cantaloup,
musk melon. Melon peyi Native melon. Melon dlo
Watermelon.
melyasin nan n Type of machete.
memwa a, menmwa n Memory*.
men 1
an n Hand. Li mouri penso’l nan men’l He
died with the paint brush in his hand. Fèt a la men
Made by hand; handmade. Bat men To applaud.
Bay lanmen To shake hands. Lave men siye atè To
do useless things, to defeat one’s purpose. Nan men
From. M’pran tou sa m’te jwenn nan men’l I took
everything I could find from him. Ban’m you kout
men Lend me a hand. Leve men sou yon moun To
hit, to strike, to lay one’s hand on s.o. Lave men
nan figi yon moun To slap s.o. repeatedly. Pran
men ou ak mwen Keep your distance from me;
watch your step.
men 2
adv Here is, here are; look here, behold.
Men kijan sa pase Here’s how that happened.
men 3
conj But; yet, still. MORISSEAULEROY/A-21:
Pale. Men sonje sa m’di ou Speak,
but remember what I told you. Men tou However.
Men wi Of course; yes, oh yes, absolutely.
men 4
pers pron In some areas of the South (e.g.
Jérémie), the personal pronoun ‘men’ is used
instead of ‘mwen’.
menaj la, mennaj, mennay n 1. Household work.
Fè mennaj To do housework. 2. Lover, fiancée,
boyfriend, girlfriend, sweetheart. V boubout.
L’ap pale ak mennaj li She is talking with her
boyfriend.
menaje vt To be careful not to hurt or offend;
to spare someone. Jeran ou lan malad, se pou ou
menaje’l Your servant is sick; you’ll have to spare
him.
menajè a n Cleaning woman, housekeeper.
V bòn.
menas la, mennas n Menace*, threat.
menase, mennase vt To threaten, to menace*.
menm attrib Identical, same, exact, self-same.
(adv) Very, precisely; as for; at all; even. Examples
and expressions: La menm Immediately, on the
spot, right there. Se sa menm Naturally; of course.
Menm si Even if. With a negative “menm”
means “at all”. Mwen pa renmen kay sa a menm I
don’t like that house at all. Jodi a menm This very
day. MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-18: Rwa Kreyon
menm As for King Creon. PRESSOIR-11: Menm
flè yo pat si bèl ankò Even the flowers were no
longer so beautiful. Li menm menm As for him.
Kan menm Anyway. Se li menm That’s he, she, it
(self). Se sa menm That’s it. Se Pyè menm m’te
wè It’s Peter himself I saw.
menmman, mèmman adv Equally, same. Often
in the expression: Menmman, parèyman It’s the
same thing, likewise.
menmwa V memwa
mennaj V menaj
mennas V menas
mennase V menase
mennen vt To lead; to take away. To drive (a
car) (rare). M’a mennen ou la I’ll take you there.
Mennen’l vini Bring him here to me. Vant mennen
Diarrhea.
menòt la, mennòt n Handcuffs.
menote, mennote vt To handcuff.
mens attrib Slim, thin, fine, small.
mensi vi To become thin.
ménuizye a, ménwizye, minizye n Carpenter,
cabinet maker, joiner.
meprize vt 1. To despise, to scorn, to slight, to
have contempt for, to spurn. 2. To ignore.
mera a n Poison. Manje mera Poisoned food.
Pran nan mera To get trapped, to fall for it. To bite
the hook.
mereng nan n Merengue* (The Haitian national
dance).
merès 1
la n Dye used in the treatment of leather.
merès 2
, rès M’fè merès pou konvenk li I did my
best to convince him.
meriken V ameriken
merilan an n 1. Servant, domestic (pej). 2. Things
of inferior quality, for instance mango merilan .
(syn) restavèk.
merit la n Merit*.
merite vt To deserve, to need, to merit*. Li
merite you ti kouch penti It needs a coat of paint.
Ki pa merite Unworthy.
mès 1
n Habits, customs, manners. Movèz mès,
move mès Bad manners.
129 M
mès 2
la, lanmès, lamès n Ecclesiastical mass*.
Bay chante you mès To have a Mass celebrated.
Sèvi lanmès To serve a Mass. Mès nwa Black
mass.
mesaj la n Message*.
mesajè a n Messenger*. V komisyonè.
mèsi n Thanks, appreciation. Di mèsi To thank,
to say thanks.
mesken attrib Narrow, petty, mean, niggardly.
mesye a n The man, the gentleman. Mesye yo
Messrs*., men, gentlemen. V msye.
mesye dam (la sosyete) n Ladies and gentlemen.
met Contracted form of mete to put. “Met” may
not be placed at the end of a sentence. Met liv
la sou tab la Put the book on the table.
mèt 1
la n 1. Master*. 2. Owner. 3. Teacher,
instructor. 4. Title of respect. Examples and
expressions: Mèt kay la Host, owner. Mètdam
Sly, crafty, sharp, trickster; one who can buy and
sell you. Mouche tèlman mètdam, pèsonn pa vle
wè’l The man is such a trickster, nobody likes him.
Mèt kont (Professional) storyteller. Mèt jwèt The
person in whose premises a game is taking place.
(He usually cuts the pot). Mèt tèt The loa who
resides in one’s head (COURLANDER). Liv sa a
rele’m “chè mèt chè mètrès” This book belongs to
me! The book is really mine. Mèt pèl The worker
whose duty is to mix mortar at a construction site.
Mèt kay Landlord. Mèt tè Landowner. Mèt
boutik la Shop owner, store keeper.
mèt 2
la Meter*.
mèt 3
(gen) an auxiliary. To be able, to be
allowed. Ou mèt vini You may come. M’mèt di
ou, ou pap kwè’m I can tell you, but you will not
believe me. Ou fin ak travay la, ou mèt ale You
finished the work; you can go. Lapli mèt tonbe,
m’pral sòti maten an Even if it rains, I’ll go out
this morning.
mèt 4
a koulis la, mètakoulis n Tape measure.
metal la n Metal*.
metalik attrib Twal metalik Wire gauze. Douko
metalik Metallic* paint (car).
metba V miba
mete vt 1. To put, to insert. 2. To wear, to get
on, to put on. 3. To begin, to start to. Examples
and expressions: Mete deyò (trans) To kick out;
(intrans) To go away, to make away. Mete atè To
bear (animals), to foal, to calve, etc.; to fire from a
job, to abandon; to put (something) on the ground.
Pa mete To omit. Mete pase genyen To exaggerate.
Mete ak To compare with. Ou pa ka met sa a ak sa
a You can’t compare this with that. Odèt mete
chante Odette began to sing. Mete (kò) ou sou kote
Get over to one side. Mete’l nan plas li To put
someone in his place. Mete a jenou To kneel. Mete
avèk To take sides with, to associate with. Mete
nanm The process of restoring a soul that has been
taken from a body (COURLANDER). M’mete
deyò = m’ale I’m going away. (fig) To translate.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-8: Yo mete’l deja nan
tout lang It has already been translated into all
languages. Mete pase genyen To say that there is
more to the story than there really is. Mete you
bagay deyò To show, divulge, to put out (something).
Mete ba, mi ba To give birth, to bear (animals).
Mete bonnanj sou ou Pull yourself together. Mete
bouch To meddle, to interfere. Pa mete bouch ou
sou mwen Don’t mention such bad things, they
might happen (to me). Mete sou li, nonm nan pa
gen kòb In addition to that, the man has no money.
metòd la n Method*.
metrès la, mètrès la n Mistress*, proprietress.
V mèt. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-10: Metrès ti
kochon va reziye’l The owner of the little pig will
resign herself. Metrèsdam nan Sly, crafty woman,
one who can buy and sell you. Kay sa a rele’m “chè
mèt chè mètrès” This house is really all mine.
mètri vt To squeeze, to bruise (fruit, etc.). Pa
mètri tomat yo Don’t bruise the tomatoes.
metrize vt To overpower.
metsiyen V medsiyen
metye a n Occupation, profession, trade, business,
job, craft; habit, custom. Se you metye apa That’s
a separate and distinct (i.e. special) trade. Ki metye
ou? What’s your line (of work)? Se metye li chak
you jete fatra nan lari a He makes a habit of
littering the street. De nèg sa yo nan metye Those
two are homosexuals.
mèvèy la n Marvel*, wonder. Bèl mèvèy Wonderful
thing.
mèveye attrib Wonderful, fantastic, marvelous*.
mezanj la n Chickadee, titmouse.
mezanmi! mezami! n (My) friends. Lord no!
Oh boy, oh boy, oh boy! O non, mezanmi; sa pa
kab fèt Oh no! Heavens no. This is impossible;
you can’t do that!
mezi a, mizi a n Measure*, means, ability. Measurement*.
Mezi lajan ou (se) mezi wanga ou
Your magic potion will be in proportion to your pocketbook.
Mezi renmen mari’l te renmen’l And her
husband loved her so much. He loved her to such a
degree. Manje mezi ou kapab Eat as much as you
can.
mezire, mizire vt To measure*, to try on for
size. Mezire paròl ou Watch what you’re saying.
Don’t go too far.
mezondafè a n Pawnshop.
mi 1
attrib Ripe, old, mature*. Jouk mayi mi Till
the cows come home (or) Till hell freezes over; a
long time. Pou yo kab mi So they can ripen.
mi 2
an n Wall. V miray.
miba, metba, medba, mete ba vi To give birth,
to bear (animals).
M 130
mich la, mit la n Inside (white) part of bread as
opposed to the crust. Usually mich pen, mit
pen.
michan attrib 1. Wonderful, beautiful, stupendous,
fine. 2. Terrible, exceptional. Antre lan michan
Now it’s serious business; the difficult part is starting.
V mechan.
midi a n Noon, midday. A midi At noon. Apre
midi In the afternoon, this afternoon. Pran midi
To take a break, to take a rest. Travayè dwe pran
midi Workers should take a break at noon.
midonnen V anmidonnen
migan 1
an n Magical power which is supposed
to make people invisible.
migan 2
, miganm An migan (or) an miganm In
pieces. Asyèt la tonbe, li kraze an miganm The
plate fell down and broke to pieces.
migèl, migelik attrib Complicated, hard.
migrèn nan n (Mild) Migraine*, headache. V tèt-
fèmal.
mijonnen vt To plot.
mikalaw Fè mikalaw To abound, to be plentiful.
Moun te fè mikalaw nan antèman an There were
very many people at the burial ceremony.
mikro a n Microphone*.
mikròb la n Germ, microbe*,
mikte vt To moisten.
mil 1
la n Mule*. More common: milèt.
mil 2
num Thousand. Depi mil an For (since) a
long time.
milat la n Mulatto* (man).
milatrès la n Mulatto* woman
milatris The phrase “a la milatris” is used in
the game of spinning a top. Also melatris.
mile a n Type of fish. Agonostomus monticola.
milèt la n Mule*.
milisyen an n Militia* man.
militè a n Army man, soldier. Pyè leve sou de pye
militè’l Peter woke up in a bad mood, ready for
anything. Lekòl militè Military* academy.
militon an n Type of vegetable. Sechium edule.
milpat V amilpye
milpye V amilpye
miltiplikasyon an n Multiplication*.
miltipliye vt To multiply*.
milye n About a thousand.
milyon num Million*. Milyon ven A large quantity.
Li koute milyon ven It is very expensive.
milyonè a n Millionaire*.
mimi an n Pussy cat, kitten.
min 1
nan n Look(s), mien*, appearance. Mare
min To be sullen, to frown, to show disapproval,
anger, or unfriendliness.
min 2
kreyon n Lead of a pencil (graphite).
minè a n Minor*.
minen vt 1. To wear down, to undermine, to eat
away. Yon maladi k’ap minen ou A sickness that
is slowly killing (eating) you. 2. To mine* (dig).
minis la n (Cabinet) Minister*. Minis lajistis
Attorney general.
ministè a n Palace of Ministries. Ministry*.
minisyon an n Munitions*.
minit la n Minute*.
minui a, minuit la, minwi, minwit n Midnight.
Lè minui sonnen When the clock struck midnight.
Minuit la pase, anyen pa rive It’s after midnight
and nothing happened.
mirak la n Miracle*. Gen you mirak ki rive; tout
sik tounen sèl A miracle happened; all sugar turned
to salt.
miray la n Wall, partition. V mi2
.
mis 1
la n 1. Nurse in a hospital. 2. Lady. Cf. E.
miss*.
mis 2
la, misk la n Muscle*.
miskad la n Nutmeg. Degaje miskad ou Get a
move on! Do something.
miskaden an n Potion, love potion, charm.
miske In “bannann miske”. One of at least 28
types of bananas of Haiti.
mistè a n 1. Secrecy; mystery*. 2. The supernatural
in the Vodou cult. 3. The spirit with which one
becomes possessed, (usu) during a Vodou cere-
mony.
misye V msye
misyon an n 1. Mission* (assignment, task).
Voye misyon bay To send word to, to send a message
to. 2. Mission* (establishment).
misyonè a n Missionary*.
mit la n 1. Mite*, moth (in clothes, etc.). 2. Inside
(soft) part of bread as opposed to the crust. Cf.
mich.
mitan an n 1. Middle*, midst, center. Nan mitan
Among. Nan mitan nou Among us, in our midst.
Poto mitan Center pole of an hounfo. 2. Half
(time) in sports. Dezyèm mitan Second half (of a
soccer game).
miting nan, mitin n 1. Rally, political gathering.
2. (Rarely) meeting*.
131 M
mitonnen vi One stage of the cooking process.
Pwa a ap mitonnen; talè li pral kuit The beans are
boiling; soon they’ll be ready.
mitrayèz la n Machine-gun.
miyèt, myèt n Tiny piece, small part, crumb. An
miyèt moso In tiny pieces. Ti miyèt ankò, li mouri
By a hair’s breadth, he escaped death.
miyò attrib 1. Better, best. 2. Improved (health).
Also “pi miyò” is heard as in most languages
and dialects. Generally heard in old adages.
Today one prefers “pi bon”. Ou miyò pase’m
You’re in better shape (financially) than I am.
miyonnen vt To caress, to cajole, to wheedle, to
coddle, to cuddle, to pamper.
miz la n Bet, stake (money placed as a bet).
V pari.
mizadò attrib Slow, loitering. n Sluggish fellow.
Usually refers to a child or servant who upon
being sent on an errand takes too much time
before returning.
mize 1
a n Museum*.
mize 2
vi 1. To stay late, to delay (intrans. only),
to loaf, to waste time. 2. To stake (in games),
i.e. to place money as a bet. Examples and
expressions: M’pap mize I won’t stay long. Mize
nan chemen To loiter. Mize sou sèt Place your bet
on number seven (ex. roulette); put it on number
seven. Li mize nan tou sa l’ap fè He is slow in
everything he does.
mizè a, lamizè, lanmizè n Poverty, misery*, trouble
(s), misfortune. Fè you moun pase mizè To give
(s.o.) a hard time, to mistreat (s.o.). Ala mizè
mari’l ap fè’l pase What a hard time her husband is
giving her.
mizerab attrib Miserable*, indigent. n Poor
soul.
mizèrere a n 1. Suffering, grief, pain, misery*.
2. (fig) Excruciating, terrible, extreme. Maldan
mizèrere Very painful toothache. Lat.
mizerikòd 1
la n Euphemism for sex organs.
mizerikòd 2
, la mizerikòd n 1. Mercy. Interj My
God! Misericordia*! Lè yo nan malè, yo rele
gras, mizerikòd When they have a misfortune, they
cry for mercy.
mizik la n Music*, tune.
mizisyen an n 1. Musician*. 2. Type of singing
bird.
mo 1
a n Word. Di gro mo To curse, to use bad
words. (fig) To be vulgar. Tou sa se mo Those
are just words. You can’t prove it. A lot of hot air.
mo 2
n Pain, ache. M’gen moldan I have a
toothache.
mò1
a n 1. Death. Se pou ou chèche konnen ki mò
ki tiye lanprè You must find out why. 2. Dead
person, corpse, cadaver. Fèt lèmò, fèt dè mò All
Souls’ day. Manje lèmò Term used in Vodou ceremonies;
a special food offering in memory of the
dead. Wè mò To be extremely angry, to go out of
bounds.
mò 2
n Evil spirit, death spell. Yo voye mò sou li
They cast a death spell on him.
mò 3
a n Bit, i.e., bridle, horse’s bit.
mò 4
attrib 1. Numb. M’te gen yon si gro lakranp,
pye’m te mò I had such a bad cramp, my feet were
numb. 2. Dead (in the game of marbles).
mòd la, lamòd n Mode*, fashion, style. Alamòd
In the fashion, in vogue, fashionable. Li pa alamòd
He is old-fashioned. Li gen you mòd, li... He has
the bad habit of...
mòde vt To bite (into), to sting. PRESSOIR-26:
Pou lòt pa mòde ou So that the other won’t bite you.
Sa mòde (or) sa mache It was successful.
mòde soufle V soufle mòde
modèl la n Model*, pattern, design.
modèn attrib Modern*.
modès attrib Reticent, modest*.
modi vt To damn, to curse. Also: Damned,
accursed.
modòd la n Rallying word, signal, order*.
mòg la n Morgue*.
moke vt To mock*, make fun of.
mòksis attrib Somber, in a bad mood, angry.
molas attrib 1. Soft. 2. Listless, not energetic,
too soft.
moldan an, mal dan n Toothache.
mole attrib Soft-boiled. Ze mole Soft-boiled egg.
moleste vt To reprimand, to rebuke.
mòlèt la n Calf (of leg).
moli vt To soften, to slacken.
mòlmèk Fè mòlmèk To abound, to be plentiful.
mòlòkòy 1
la n Land turtle.
mòlòkòy 2
attrib Lethargic, listless.
molyann attrib Sluggish, slow moving, indolent,
listless. (syn) mòlòkòy, molas.
moman an n Moment*, instant. Nan you moman
Presently (soon), in a moment; in a jiffy (fast).
mon My (Is used only with certain nouns and
expressions). Mon chè, monchè My dear.
mòn nan n Hill, mountain. Morne*. Moun mòn
Hillbillies. Also: Abitan mòn. Nan mòn, yo fè
boukan pou chofe lò gen fredi In the hills they build
a fire when they feel cold.
monben an n Spondias monbin L.
M 132
monchè, mon chè My dear. (Applied to males).
My friend.
monfi, monfis Sonny, my son, my child.
mongonmen, mangonmen vi To be mixed up
(situations, things; not persons). (attrib) Mixed
up, complicated. Bagay la mongonmen The situation
is complicated.
monitè a n Teacher in adult education programs.
monkonmon attrib Idiot, stupid, dumb (Jérémie).
monkonpè V konpè
monnen an n Change (money*).
monnonk V nonk
mòno attrib Hick, stupid person, peasant.
monpè a, pè a n Priest.
mons la n Monster*.
monseyè a, monsenyè a n Bishop, monsignor*.
Worldwide ecclesiastical Italianism.
monstre attrib Angry, somber, mean looking.
mont la n Watch (timepiece). Mete yon mont sou
lè To set a watch on time. Mont ou a an avans
Your watch is fast. Mont ou a an reta Your watch
is slow. Yon brasle mont A wrist watch.
montan an n Upright (post of a door).
montay la, montany, moutany n Mountain*.
More common: mòn
monte, moute vi To go up, to get up, to climb,
to ascend, to rise, to step up. vt 1. To raise, to
build, to assemble, to put together (a machine).
2. To ride (a horse), to build (a house). 3. To
confer magical power. 4. To sew (a button).
Examples and expressions: Mwen trò kout, vini
m’monte sou do ou I am too short, come so I can get
on your shoulders. Li moute chwal, li tonbe He got
on a horse; he fell. Monte an ro To go upstairs, to
climb up. Monte mont To wind a watch. Monte
nan vwati To get into a car; to ride in a car. Li
monte kay li a He built his house. Pote monte To
bring up. Monte drapo To hoist a flag. Fè (you
moun) monte To get (s.o.) up. Monte desann To
go back and forth, to go up and down. Monte Pyè
kont Pòl To incite Peter against Paul. Fè yon
monte a de To have it out, to quarrel.
monti a n 1. Setting, frame, mounting*. 2. Mount*
(horse, mule).
montre, moutre vt 1. To show. 2. To teach; to
instruct.
montwaz V mòtèz
mònye a n Uncouth, unrefined person, hick.
monyon an n Stump (limb) of a knife, (of an)
arm (not of a tree).
mòpyon an n Crab-louse.
moral la n Morale*. Remonte moral yon moun To
boost someone’s morale. Moral li ba sèjousi These
days he has low morale.
mori V lanmori
moso a, mòso a n 1. Chunk, piece, bit. 2. Piece
of music, tune. 3. Gro moso 1. Chunk. 2. Big
strong man.
mòtalite a n Case of death. Cf. E. mortality*.
Gen mòtalite kay vwazen an Someone died in the
neighbor’s house.
motè a n Motor*, engine. Blòk motè Motor block.
mòtèz la, mòtwaz, montwèz, montwaz n Mortise*
joint (wood).
motosiklèt la n Motorcycle*.
mòtsezon an n Off-season*, slack season*.
mòtye a n Mortar*.
mou attrib Tender, soft, mellow (fruit), sensitive.
Mwen pat sa kouri, paske pye’m mou I couldn’t
walk, because my feet were too sensitive.
mouch la n Fly.
mouchamyèl la n Bee. V mouch, myèl.
mouchavè a n Green fly which buzzes and feeds
on dead animals or near outhouses.
mouche 1
vi To blow one’s nose.
mouche 2
V msye
mouchwa a, mouchwè a n (Pocket) Handkerchief.
Mouchwa kou Kerchief, small shawl. Also Vodou
term.
mouka a n Kerchief (head).
moul la n Mould*, cast.
moule vt To mold*, to fit closely. Byen moule
Well molded, in beautiful shape.
moulen 1
an n Mill, grindstone. Tirwa moulen
Kneading-trough.
moulen 2
vt 1. To grind; 2. To chew, (past part)
ground. Mayi moulen Ground corn.
moulenvan an n Windmill.
moumou an n Moumou* (loose fitting African
dress).
moun nan 1
n Person, people, folks, human
being. Timoun mwen My children. Dènye moun
Everyone, each. Moun chich Stingy people. You
moun Somebody, someone, one. Ki moun Who,
whom. Moun laplenn Plainspeople. Moun lavil
City people. Granmoun Adults. Moun mòn Country
folk, hick. Moun Pòtoprens Inhabitants of the
Capital. Okenn moun, pèsonn moun Nobody, anybody.
Moun lespri Clever people. Moun mouri Dead
people. M’pa timoun I’m no child. Kote ou moun?
Where are you from? Tout moun Everybody. Nempòt
moun, nempòt ki moun Whoever, whosoever. Moun
touse People with tuberculosis. Moun pa One’s
133 M
own, favorite. M’pa lan moun pa I’m impartial; no
favoritism. Msye se moun pa’m He is a friend of
mine. Ou se moun kay You are no stranger in this
house. Li pa moun mwen He is not devoted to me.
Moun vini Stranger, foreigner. Moun rouj A
person of light skin, mulatto. Move moun Treacherous
person; sorcerer, werewolf. Sou moun Too
familiar, out of place. Gro moun Big shot, notable.
moun2
They, one, people. Moun di... They say...
(Translates French indefinite pronoun ‘on’)
mourab attrib Mortal.
mouran attrib Je mouran Languishing eyes.
mouri vi To die, to pass away; to go out (light).
Dead, extinguished, senseless, numb. Li di doktè
a li santi tout janm li mouri He told the doctor, that
his legs couldn’t move. PRESSOIR-8: Li te konnen
se pou’l mouri He knew that he would die. Mouri
kò ou Go easy, keep quiet. Dwèt mwen te mouri
My fingers were numb. Mouri poul ou Calm down,
go easy. Mouri limen To scintillate, to twinkle.
mous la n Froth (of wine), foam, scum, moss*.
mouslin nan n Muslin*.
moustach la n Moustache*.
moustik la n Mosquito*. V bigay, marengwen.
moustikè a n Mosquito* net (the covering or
canopy over a bed to keep away the mosquitos.).
moutad la n Mustard*.
moute V monte
mouton an n Sheep. Mutton*. Ti mouton Lamb.
Mal mouton Mumps, a contagious febrile disease
caused by a virus and marked by inflammation and
swelling of the parotid gland. Pa jwe ak li; li gen
mal mouton Don’t play with him; he has the mumps.
moutre V montre
mouvman an n Movement*, motion. Pa fè
mouvman Stand still, don’t move. An de tan twa
mouvman In a jiffy.
mouvmante vt To toss (in bed). Ou mouvmante
kò ou tròp You are moving too much. Agitated.
Yon jou gen kalmi, yon lòt jou lanmè a mouvmante
One day the sea is (too) calm, another day it is too
rough.
mouye vt To wet, to drench. To be wet, to get
wet. Mouye tranp To get soaked.
mòv, mov attrib Purple, mauve*.
move attrib 1. Bad, wicked. 2. Angry.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-2: M’ap di jan nou move
I shall say how angry we are. You move odè A bad
smell, a stench. Li gen move jan He has a bad
temper. Pyè se move grenn (move je) Peter is a
scoundrel. Fè move san To get very angry, quite
upset.
movèz attrib Bad, wicked. Applied to females
or with a few nouns which are feminine in French.
Li gen movèz fwa He acts in bad faith.
movezè, move zè n Evil spirit.
movèzte a n Badness. Wickedness.
mòyòkò, mòyòkòy attrib Listless, sluggish, too
soft. Cf. molas, molyann, kòkraz.
mozayik la n Ceramic tile. Mosaic*.
mren V mwen
msye a, mouche, misye n Sir, gentleman, master;
husband; Mister*, Mr. Gro mouche Big shot.
Msye marye Bridegroom, (after marriage) married
man.
mwa a n 1. Month. Mwa daou Month of August.
2. (monthly) menstruation. Li gen mwa’l She
has her monthly (period). The form “mwad” is
used before the name of the month. Mwad
janvye The month of January.
mwatye a, lamwatye n Half. De mwatye The
sharecropper (who has to give one-half of the
produce (yield) to the owner of the land). Ban’m
lamwatye Give me half.
mwayen 1
attrib Medium-sized, average (occurs
after a noun). Li se yon elèv mwayen He is an
average student.
mwayen 2
an, moyen an n Means, financial
means, wherewithal; possibility, way. Nan pwen
mwayen pou fè’l There is no way to do it.
mwayen 3
an n The middle-sized Arada drum
(COURLANDER).
mwayèn 1
nan, mwayenn, lamwayèn n Average.
Li pat fè moyèn li He didn’t make the passing
grade.
mwayèn 2
, mwayenn attrib Middle-sized, ordinary.
You ti mwayenn bèf A middle-sized ox.
mwazi V mwezi
mwèl la, mwal la n 1. Marrow. 2. Core.
mwen 1
, mren, men pers pron First pers sing
personal pronoun: I, me. It may be used prepositively
or postpositively. Di mwen Tell me. Se
sa ou reponm mwen! So that’s the answer you give
me! Mwen ak Jan Me and John (the more usual
and popular form of “John and I”). In the
Southern region of Haiti, “men” is used instead
of “mwen”.
mwen 2
poss adj My (sing or plur). “Mwen yo”
plur. Nan lang mwen In my language. Nan lang
pa mwen In my own language. Se pa fòt mwen
It’s not my fault. Toulede se te frè mwen Both were
my brothers.
mwen 3
, mwens adv Minus*. Midi mwen ven
Twenty minutes to twelve.
mwenmenm pers pron Me, I, myself.
N 134
mwenn attrib The least, the smallest. Mwenn ti
van The slightest wind.
mwens adv Fewer, less, minus*. (superlative:
the least). Mwens ke Under, less than.
mwezi, mwazi attrib Mildewy, moldy, musty. Pen
an rete nan imidite, li vini mwezi The bread was in
a damp place; it became moldy.
mwik, mwèk (onom) Anything at all. Li pa di
mwik He didn’t open his mouth.
myann, lanmyann interj Go to hell!
myaw interj (onom) Meow*, the cry of a cat.
mye adv Better; improvement. Fè mye To feel
better. Malad la fè mye jodi a The patient feels
better today. Li fè yon ti mye He feels slightly
better.
myèl la n Bee. The usual word for honey is siro
myel. Maten an fi a move tankou myèl This
morning the woman is mad as hell. Bwat myèl
Beehive in a wooden box.
myèt V miyet
myoukmyouke vi To scintillate, to twinkle.
N
n 1
pers pron Contracted, conjunctive form of
pers pron nou. We, us (1 pl); you (2 pl).
N’achete We bought. Sa’n vle? What do you want?
n 2
poss adj Our (1st pers plur), your (2nd pers
plur). Men’n Our hands, your hands. Po’n Our
skin, your skin. (Some people use n by assimilation
instead of the regular l (short form of li)
his, her, its; him, her, it. This usage is not
recommended because it creates a confusion
between n and l. Li netwaye dan’n He cleaned his
teeth). [Instead of “dan’l”].
nachon V nasyon
nadmarinad, nad marinad Nothing at all.
nago n 1. Type of dance rhythm (Haitian folklore).
2. African ethnic group. M’pap fè ni yon pa kita
ni yon pa nago I’m staying here, I won’t budge.
naj A la naj Swimming. M’kapab al Lagonav a la
naj I can swim to La Gonave. An naj (or) nan
naj Drenched to the bones.
naje vi To swim.
najè a n Swimmer. Gran najè pa di pwason pou sa
Being a fine swimmer doesn’t mean you are a fish.
nak la n Mother of pearl. Li gen you kostim ki
gen kat bouton nak He has a suit with four mother
of pearl buttons.
nan 1
, lan def art Determiner, definite article
sing: the. It is used after nasal consonant sounds
or after a consonant preceded by a nasal vowel
sound. Telegram nan The telegram. Endepandans
lan The independence. V a, la, an.
nan 2
, lan prep In, into, within, among, from.
The terms are synonymous. FRANKETIENNE/D-114:
Sou lèzèl nou ravitaye “lan”
pousyè “nan” labou... Se nan fè enpridans li mouri
His imprudence (his being imprudent) was his downfall.
After ‘youn’, “nan (lan)” is translated as
“of”. Youn lan pitit sa yo One of these children.
Chans sa a sòt nan syèl pou mwen That opportunity
comes from heaven for me. Ou pran abitid sa a nan
ras You get that habit from your family. Dizè nan
maten Ten o’clock in the morning.
nan 3
mitan prep Among, between, amid, amidst.
Also Lan mitan In the middle of. Nan sans
Toward, in the direction of.
nanchon V nasyon
nandemen V lelandmen
nanm nan n Soul; spirit. Mete nanm sou ou Be
alert! Watch what you’re doing. San nanm Without
energy. Pran nanm To bewitch, to put under a
spell. Wete nanm To take away one’s spirit, to
stump, to make numb.
nanmèd V lanmèd
nannan 1
an n The inside(s), the pulpy or meaty
part of a fruit or nut; the entire inside of the eye
exclusive of the brow or lashes; (fig) substance
(guts). Nannan kokoye Copra. M’ap foure piman
an nan nannan je ou I’ll put pepper in your eyes.
Ou san nannan You have no guts.
nannan 2
an n Food (child’s language).
nannan 3
vi To eat (child’s language).
nannize vi To speak with a nasal twang.
nannwit V lannuit
nanpami V pami
nanpwen, nan pwen There is no..., there isn’t
any... Nan pwen anyen There’s really nothing.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-14: Nanpwen you sèl jan
pou soti nan sa There is no possible way out.
nap la n Tablecloth. Yo te mete bèl nap sou tab la
lò maryaj la They had placed a beautiful tablecloth
on the table for the wedding.
napron an, napon n Doily, table napkins. Napon
yo sal, lave yo The napkins are dirty; wash them.
nas la n (Fish) trap.
nasyon an, nachon, nanchon n 1. Race, nation*.
2. The entire loa family or tribe. Nanchon nou pa
konsa, tout moun rekonèt la-lwa Our nation is not
like that; everybody respects the law.
nasyonal attrib National*.
135 N
nat la n Mat, sleeping mat. Tann nat la nan
chanm nan pou’m dòmi Spread the mat in the room
so I can sleep. Chire nat yon moun To sock it to
s.o.
nati a, lanati n Nature*.
natif natal n Native*, native* born, indigenous.
natirèl attrib Natural*. Menm si li fè jefò, li pap
chanje. Se natirèl li sa Even if he makes an effort,
he won’t ever change. It’s his nature.
natirèlman adv Naturally*.
navè a, nave a n Turnip. Bon nave fè bon soup
Good turnips make good soups.
navèt la n Bobbin (of a sewing machine).
navige vi To sail.
naylonn nan n Nylon* (material).
naytklèb la, nayklèb n Nightclub*.
ne a 1
n Knot, gnarl, noose. Node*; ribbon;
knot (nautical measure). Ne koulan Noose, slip
knot, running knot. Fè you ne To tie a knot.
ne 2
attrib Born (in certain phrases). Mwen ne
pou’m mouri pòv I was born to die poor. V fèt.
Byen ne Well-born.
nè a n Tendon, nerve*. Gen nè To be nervous.
Ou eksite tout tan; al kay doktè pou kontrole nè ou
You get excited all the time; go to the doctor and tell
him to give you something to calm your nerves.
nechèl la, nèchèl la n Ladder. Si ou moute nechèl
la, ou ap tonbe If you climb the ladder, you’ll fall.
nèf 1
, nev num Nine. Y’ap peye a nev è They’ll
pay at nine o’clock. The f of nèf voices to v under
certain circumstances and then the è becomes
é.
nèf 2
attrib New.
nèg 1
la n Man, chap, fellow; Negro*, black
man. Gran nèg A rich, important person. Gro nèg
Big person (in size). Nèg lavil A city person. Nèg
mòn Peasant, hillbilly. Nèg lespri Smart, clever
person. Nèg maron Runaway Negro. Nèg sòt
Silly, dumb, stupid fellow. Nèg mwen My man.
Nèg fèy Country hick. Chè pase tèt nèg Very
expensive.
neg 2
la n Type of fish. Epinephelus striatus.
nègès la n Negress*, black woman; woman.
V wanga nègès.
neglijan attrib Careless, negligent*. Yon moun ki
neglijan pa kapab fè bon travay A negligent person
can’t do good work.
neglijans la n Negligence*. Anpil fwa timoun
malad, neglijans paran ki lakoz Many children are
sick because of the negligence of their parents. Ak
neglijans Carelessly.
neglije vt To neglect*, to omit. Mwen pa neglije
travay, m’bezwen lajan I don’t neglect my work. I
need the money.
negosyan an n Businessman, merchant, whole-
saler.
nèke, nèk adv Only, as soon as, once. Chèf la
nèke pale, tout moun obeyi Once the chief has
spoken, everyone obeys.
nekò a n A deep water stretch between two
reefs.
nemoni an n Pneumonia*.
nen 1
an n Nose, nostrils. Nen bouche Stuffed up
nose. Nen kraze, nen plati Flat nose. Nen jako
Aquiline nose. Ou gen nen fen You have a sharp
nose; you have a flair for (you’re smart). Ou san
nen nan figi ou You’re shameless, without honor.
Pòtoprens ak Leogàn se nen ak je, tèlman yo pre
Port-au-Prince and Leogane are like (your) nose
and (your) eyes; they are so close. Trou nen Nostril.
Frèt pase nen chen Colder than a dog’s nose. Vwa
nan nen Nasal twang. Pale nan nen To snuffle, to
speak with a nasal twang.
nen 2
an n Dwarf, midget.
nennenn nan, nènèn, nèn n Godmother. Nennenn
mwen di’m l’ap ban’m you bisiklèt pou Nwèl My
godmother told me she was going to give me a bicycle
for Christmas.
nenpòt, nenpòt ki indef pron Any. (It matters
not which). Nenpòt kilès Anyone, either, either
one. Nenpòt ki sa l’di’m Anything he says to me.
Nenpòt ki lè, m’ap pòte’l pou ou No matter what
time, I’ll bring it to you. Nenpòt ki jan fò’m ale
Anyway (anyhow), I have to go. Nenpòt (ki) moun
Whoever, whosoever, anyone, any person. Nenpòt
(ki) sa Whoever, whatever, anyone. Nenpòt (ki)
bagay Whatever, whatsoever. Nenpòt ki kote Any-
where.
nesans la n Birth, nature (characteristic). Li
pale kon manman’l; li pran sa nan nesans She talks
like her mother; she got it from her mother since the
day she was born.
nesesè attrib Necessary*. Sa pat nesesè That was
unnecessary. Se nesesè pou ou ale wè manman ou
jodi a You have to go see your mother today. Prezans
ou nesesè; rantre tou suit Your presence is necessary.
Come immediately.
nesesite a n Necessity*, need. Moun ki nan
nesesite pa gaspiye lajan People who are in need
don’t squander their money.
nèspa Is it not so? Ou te lekòl nèspa? You went to
school, didn’t you? (syn) pa vre?
nestri a n Saddlecloth.
nèt 1
adv 1. Altogether, completely, definitely,
entirely, thoroughly; once and for all, for real,
quite, absolutely. M’pè nèt I am really scared.
Nan kanaval la, dans medam yo te bèl nèt At
carnival time the women really danced beautifully.
N 136
Nèt ale, Nèt al kole All the way, completely. Aswè a
m’ap banboche nèt al kole This evening, I’m going
all out in the celebration.
nèt 2
adj Tidy, clean, neat.*
netche V netye
netwayaj la n Cleaning
netwaye vt To clean, to make things nice and
neat. To make a clean sweep of, to run off, to
overcome; to swab out; to cure. To clean, to
eviscerate. (fig) To make unfavorable report
on someone. Examples and expressions: M’al
jwenn bòs li, epi m’netwaye’l I went to his boss and
cleaned him out (made a complete unfavorable report).
Netwaye diri To clean rice by removing all foreign
particles, stones, etc. Netwaye pwason To clean
and prepare fish. Netwaye soulye ou byen, sinon fè
chany lan netwaye’l pou ou anvan ou soti Clean
your shoes (well), or have the shoeshine boy clean
them for you before you go out.
netye, netche vt 1. To chastise, to beat, to destroy,
to fix. M’ap netye ou I’ll fix you. 2. To clean.
Netye yon jaden To clean a garden. 3. To take to
one’s heels.
nèvan V enèvan
neve a n Nephew*.
nève attrib Nervous*.
nevèn nan, levèn, nevenn n Novena*.
nevyèm num Ninth.
neye V nwaye
ngan V oungan
ngangan V oungan
ngongòlò V gongòlò
ni 1
attrib Naked, bare, nude*. It’s rarely used
except in fixed phrases. Much more common
are “toutouni, touni”.
ni 2
Variant of “li”. Manman ni His mother. Use
“li” instead.
ni 3
conj Nor, (not)...or. Yo pat manje ni bwè
They didn’t eat nor (or) drink.
ni 4
...ni conj Both... and; Either... or; Neither...
nor (usually with pa). V ou...ou Ni granmoun
ni timoun, tout moun ap peye kat yo anvan yo antre
Both old and young everyone will pay for his ticket
before going in. Li pa fè ni de ni twa Without
further ado, without doing anything else. Ni Josèf
ni Pòl pa vini Neither Joseph nor Paul came. Kilès
ki mouri lan de yo? Ni youn ni lòt Which one of the
two died? Neither one.
ni tou, nitou conj But also, further, apart from
that. Furthermore. Ou di’m ou se mekanisyen.
Se pa vre. Nitou ou pa kapab fè travay sa a You
tell me you’re a mechanic. It’s not true. Furthermore,
you can’t even do that work.
nich la n 1. Nest. 2. Doghouse. 3. Mistress.
Tonbe nan yon nich foumi To fall into danger (Cf.
E. to fall into a hornet’s nest.). Ti zwazo fè nich
nan branch bwa The little bird builds its nest on the
tree branch.
niche vt To lick*, to lap. V lanbe.
nichè a n Licker*, lapper, sucker. V lanbè.
nil attrib Worthless, good for nothing, awkward,
useless; void. Fè match nil The score is tied. Fè
mouvman nil To make a useless effort (movement).
nim nan n Type of African mahogany grown in
Haiti.
nimero a, limero a n Number*, lottery number,
measure, size. Ki nimero kostim ou pote? What
size suit do you wear? Ouvè jeografi a nan paj nèf,
nimero twa Open the geography book on page nine,
number three. Chak fi li jwenn, li promèt yo maryaj.
Msye se you nimero He promises to marry every girl
he meets; but he’s a foreflusher (character). M’konn
nimero’l I know what he can do (pej). Fè (or)
“pase” you nimero telefòn To dial a telephone
number.
Nini n Nini (a proper name). Se bounda Nini
Who cares? It’s nothing. It doesn’t amount to a
hill of beans.
nivo 1
a n Level (including “level”, mason’s tool).
A nivo (or) o nivo Horizontal, on the same level.
Ki nivo l’ap rive What level will it reach? Si you
mason pa gen nivo’l li pa ka travay If the mason
doesn’t have his level, he can’t work.
nivo 2
attrib Novel, fresh, brand new. Kafe nivo
Coffee that is brand new; the first bag of the harvest
season. It is not so strong as regular coffee. Nan
sezon sa a, ap gen anpil mayi nivo In this season
there will be much new corn.
nivre, annivre Bwa annivre Tephrosia toxicaria
Pers. Plant claimed to be an aphrodisiac.
nò a, lenò n North*. Nan nò In the North. Moun
nan nò pa pale menm jan ak moun nan sid People
in the North speak in a different way from those in
the South. Gen lapli nan nò jis tan moun pa sa sòti
It rains (so hard) in the North till people can’t go
out.
nòde a n Northeast* wind, nor’easter. Kan nòde
soufle, lanmè move When the nor’easter blows, the
sea becomes rough.
nofraj la n Shipwreck. Fè nofraj To sink, to go
under (ship).
nòkaout vt To knock-out* (in boxing).
nòmal attrib Normal*.
nominasyon an n Appointment to a position.
non 1
an n Name. Li pote non’l He lives up to his
name. Yo ba li you ti non “koukou” paske li lèd
They nicknamed him “koukou” because he is so
homely. Ti non, non jwèt, non gate Nickname. Bay
non To give a bad name, to slander.
137 N
non 2
adv No. Ou ap vini? Non Are you coming?
No. Pran bwat la pou mwen. Non, m’pa kapab
Take the box for me. No, I can’t.
non 3
adv No (Expletive. Often used to strengthen
the negation already expressed by ‘pa’. Sometimes
best left untranslated. “Non” is also used
not as a negation, but rather for emphasis only).
Vini non Come, won’t you. Pa kriye non! Don’t
cry! Pa mize nan chemen non Don’t loiter on the
road. Mwen pa renmen sa non No, I don’t like
that.
nonbrit V lonbrit
nonk la, monnonk la n Uncle*. Cf. matant.
We find “nuncle” even in Shakespeare. Li se
nonk mwen, frè manman’m He’s my uncle, my
mother’s brother.
nonm nan, lòm, òm n Man; husband. Pl.
lezòm. Nonm deyò Lover (of a married woman).
Monte chwal a òm To straddle a horse. Nonm sa a
se tout tan m’ap di’l: pa vin isit la ankò That man
- I keep telling him: Don’t come here again. Ou pa
bezwen pale, nonm mwen okipe’m byen You don’t
have to speak, my husband takes care of me very
well.
nonmen, lonmen vt To name, to appoint, to
confer a title on someone; to mention, to cite
(a name). Presidan an nonmen’l minis The president
appointed him a cabinet minister. Pa nonmen non’m
souple Please don’t mention my name.
nonpli, non pli adv Neither, not..either. Nonpli
tou li pa vini Nor did he come.
nonsèlman, non sèlman conj Not only. Non
sèlman yo chante, yo danse tou They not only sing;
they dance too.
nòrwa a, nòwa a n Northwest* wind. Cf. “Sirwa”
Southwest wind; “nòde” Northeast wind. Nòrwa
a move jodi a There’s a bad northwest wind (blowing)
today.
nòs la n Wedding, wedding party. Nòs la ap fèt
samdi The wedding will take place on Saturday.
nosan attrib Innocent*. Rare. Cf. Neap. nuzende
‘id’.
nòstròm Our man so and so.
nòt la n Note* (musical); note (message, record);
mark(s), grade(s) in school. Pandan mèt la ap
pale, pran nòt While the teacher is speaking, take
notes. Pran nòt de sa Make a record of it. Li
pibliye you nòt sou jounal He published a note in
the newspaper.
notab la n Dignitary, (Notable*) person, person
of importance, outstanding personage. Pi gro
notab nan vil la mouri. Ki moun ki kab ranplase’l?
The greatest personnage in the town died. Who can
replace him?
note vt To record; to notice, to note*.
notè a, nòtè a n Notary*. M’pral kay notè pou’m
sa regle afè tè’m nan I’m going to the lawyer (notary)
to straighten out my property.
nou 1
, n pers pron 1. We, us. 2. You (plur. only).
Nou konn sa We know that (or) You know that.
nou 2
, n poss adj 1. Our. Papa nou Our father.
2. Your (plur. only). Pitit nou Your child.
nouga a, nounga a n Nougat*. V tablèt.
noumenm pers pron 1. Ourselves. 2. Yourselves.
nouri vt To feed, to nourish*. M’byen nouri,
m’pa santi feblès I’m well nourished. I don’t feel
any weakness.
nouris la n Nursing mother; wet nurse. Zepeng
nouris Safety pin. Lè you abitan nouris, li toujou
vlope kou’l ak mouchwa When a peasant is a
(child’s) nurse, she always wraps her neck with a
kerchief.
nourisan attrib Nutritious*, nourishing*. Pa gen
anyen ki nourisan kon lèt There is nothing so nourishing
as milk.
nouriti a, lanouriti n Food. Nourishment*.
V manje. Si timoun yo te jwenn plis nouriti, yo ta
pi gro If the children had more nourishment, they
would be bigger.
nouvèl la n (Piece of) News. MORISSEAULEROY/D-8:
Voye nouvèl la Nouyòk Send the
news to New York. Bay nouvèl To inform. Ban’m
nouvèl manman ou How is your mother? Ki nouvèl?
What’s new?
nouvo attrib New*, recent. Gen nouvo pè nan
legliz la There’s a new priest in the church.
Nouyòk, Nyouyòk n New York*.
novanm n November*. Lapli tonbe tout mwa
novanm nan The rain fell during the whole month
of November.
now adv No*. Now, m’pa kapab No! I just can’t.
Now, m’pap aksepte sa Nossuh, I can’t accept that.
noyo a n Kernel, pit (seed).
nuaj la, nyaj, nway n Cloud. Syèl la chaje ak
nuaj; lapli pral tonbe The sky is full of clouds, it’s
going to rain. Nuaj sigarèt Cigarette puff (smoke).
nui, nwi vt To harm, to hurt, to cause a nuisance*,
to tease, to torment, to bother, to annoy. Ret
trankil, pa nwi’m Be quiet; don’t bother me.
nuit la, lannuit, nwit n Night. Li pase nuit blanch
He had a sleepless night. Li pa dòmi lannuit He
doesn’t sleep at night. Tout lannuit All night long.
nuizans la, nwizans n Nuisance*, trouble, problem,
damage; teasing, vexation. Se you nwizans
pou mwen It’s a worry for me.
nuizib, nwizib attrib Annoying, pestering, vexing,
nagging, teasing, harmful (causing damage). Chat
la nuizib, pa kite’l la a The cat is pestering (harmful);
don’t leave her there.
O 138
nwa 1
a n Nut, walnut, cashew (nut). Po nwa
Nutshell.
nwa 2
a, fènwa a n M’pap mache nan nwa pou kont
mwen I won’t walk in the dark alone. Nan fènwa
In the dark.
nwa 3
, nwè attrib Black. “nwè” is stronger than
“nwa”. Usually means very black or jet black.
Fè nwa It is dark. M’wè ou an nwa. Ou te gen
moun mouri? I saw you wearing a black dress.
Did some relative of yours die? Nwè kon lank Pitch
black. Also Nwè kon dèyè chodyè.
nwakou a, nwa kou n Nape of the neck.
nwal V nwèl
nwasi vi To blacken, to darken.
nway V nuaj
nwaye, neye vi To drown, to get drowned. (Both
forms are used everywhere). M’wè ou ap antre
nan dlo fon, si ou pa konn naje ou ap neye I see
you’re going in deep water; if you don’t know how to
swim, you’ll drown.
nwazèt la n Nut.
nwè V nwa
nwèl la, nwal n Christmas.
nyapad There isn’t... There aren’t..
nye vt To deny*; to abandon. It has also the
meaning of ‘reject’. Ou pa kab nye ou pat di sa
You can’t deny you said it. Poutèt li fè kòz sa a,
tout fanmi’l nye’l On account of his terrible deed his
entire family disowned him.
nyè attrib Simple, foolish, stupid, ridiculous, silly.
nyès la n Niece*. Nyès mwen an pral marye My
niece is going to get married.
nyezri a n Foolishness.
nyouz la n News*. Monchè, ban’m ti nyouz ou
What’s new with you?
O
o 1
interj Oh*! Interj. of surprise.
o 2
interj Pitit o, sa ou ap fè konsa? Son, what’s
this I heard that you’ve been doing?
o 3
At, to. O gadavou At attention.
ò An ò Golden. V lò a.
obeyi vt To obey*.
obeyisan attrib Obedient*, obliging.
obeyisans la n Obedience*.
obligasyon an n Obligation*.
obligatwa attrib Obligatory*, compulsory.
oblijan attrib Obliging*. Ou mal oblijan; ou pa
vle rann mwen sèvis You are mean; you won’t help
me at all.
oblije, bije, blije vt To oblige*. To be obliged*,
to be constrained, forced, required.
obsèvasyon an, opsèvasyon n Scolding, reprimand,
reproach. M’fè’l obsèvasyon I reprimanded
him.
obsève vt 1. To observe*. 2. To reprimand, to
scold.
ochan n Salutation, honors, national hymn. Bèl
ochan pou jeneral A musical greeting for the general.
òd V lòd
odas la, lodas n Daring, boldness, audacity*. Ou
gen odas di ou pat fè sa You have the gall to say
you didn’t do it.
odasye attrib Shameless, insolent, impudent, dishonest,
insistent in telling a lie. (Said of one
who is insistent, regardless of incontrovertible
evidence to the contrary; one who has a “nerve”
or a lot of courage. Si ou pa odasye ou pa reyisi
nan lavi If you don’t go after the impossible, you
won’t get anywhere. “Odasyèz”: Applied to fe-
males.
odè a, lodè n Odor*, scent, smell; bad smell;
perfume. V sant, santò. There are good and
bad smells. Bon odè Fragrance.
odeyid la n Used clothing that are sold.
òdinè attrib Vulgar, coarse, ordinary*, of inferior
quality.
odle a, òdeli a n Orderly* to an officer, aide de
camp.
òdonans la n 1. Aide de camp, soldier, orderly
to an officer. 2. Doctor’s prescription.
òdone vt To order, to command.
odyans la, lodyans n Jokes, chatting, chit-chat,
talk, conversation; stories (true or otherwise).
Bay odyans To chat, tell stories.
odyansè a n 1. A fine conversationalist who
knows and tells many stories. 2. One who is a
big talker and does nothing.
òf Off*. To be absent from work. Li òf jodi a
He is off* today.
ofanse vt To offend*.
òfelen an, òflen n Orphan*.
ofèt adv Actually, in fact*.
òfèv la n Jeweler.
ofiamezi, fiamezi As; progressively.
ofis la, lofis n Scullery, supply room; pantry,
kitchen cabinet. Office*.
139 O
ofisye a n Officer* (in the army).
ofisyedetasivil la n Registrar of vital statistics.
ofisyèl attrib Official*. By extension “official
car”. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-26: Li pa gan lè
pou’l ap roule nan ofisyèl He can roll around in the
official car any time he wants to.
ofisyèlman adv Officially*.
ofrann nan n Offering*.
ofri vt To offer*.
òg la n Organ* (musical instrument).
ogadavou At attention (Milit).
ogan an n The metal percussion device that
accompanies the Arada drums. Traditionally, a
forged iron bell, but it may be a hoe blade or
any other piece of resonant iron or steel (COUR-
LANDER).
ògàn nan n Gen gran ògàn To have a loud voice.
òganizasyon an n Organization*.
òganize vt To organize*.
ogatwa a, rogatwa, wogatwa n Oratory*, altar.
ògèy la, lògèy n Pride, anger, arrogance, conceit.
Se ògèy ki tiye’l Pride killed him. Li refize; l’ap fè
ògèy He refused because his pride was hurt.
ògeye attrib Haughty.
ogmantasyon an n Increase, raise. Yo bay ogmantasyon
mwa sa a There is an increase in salary this
month.
ogmante vt & vi To step up, to increase, augment*.
Ogoun n Vodou deity.
ojis adv Exactly, precisely; to tell the truth. Ojis,
sa ou vle? What do you want exactly?
OK adv O.K.* V oke.
oka V anka
okabine 1
a, kabine a n Feces, excrement.
okabine 2
vi To have a bowel movement. Malad
la pa okabine ditou The patient didn’t have a bowel
movement. V poupou.
Okap n City of Cape-Haitian.
Okay n Third largest city in Haiti. It is a
seaport in the South.
okazyon an, lokazyon n Occasion*, chance,
opportunity, means of transportation. M’a voye
lajan an ba ou semèn prochèn; pral gen you okazyon
I’ll send you the money next week; there’s a fine
occasion (It happens that somebody is coming there
next week). Se yon okazyon It’s a bargain.
oke adv O.K.*; all right. Also: Interjection.
Universal Americanism.
okenn, ankenn 1. indef adj No, (not) at all.
Okenn lapli pa tonbe There was no rainfall. Ankenn
moun, pèsonn moun Nobody, anybody. Ankenn bagay
Nothing, anything. 2. indef pron No one. Ankenn
pa vini No one came.
òkès la n Orchestra*.
òkèt V ròkèt
okipasyon an, lokipasyon n Occupation*, work,
business. FARDIN-12: Li ta vle gen okipasyon
He would like to find a job.
okipe vt To occupy* one’s self with, to manage,
to look after, to busy one’s self with, to take care
of, to pay attention to. MORISSEAU-LEROY/A-7:
Antigòn gan rezon’l pou’l okipe kadav frè’l Antigone
has her reasons to want to take care of her brother’s
body. Pa okipe moun Don’t bother about people.
Just do your thing. M’okipe I am busy.
okontrè, o kontrè On the contrary*.
okouran Informed, current* (with), aware (of).
Eske ou okouran maryaj Bouki? Do you know about
Bouqui’s wedding? Mete okouran To inform, to
acquaint.
oksijene attrib Dlo oksijene Hydrogen peroxide.
oktòb n October*.
okton an n Office messenger, low rank employee.
ola Mete ola To stop, to put an end (to).
olande, olandè n Dutchman, Hollander*. Adj
Dutch.
ole 1. With cream. Kafe ole Coffee with cream.
V lèt. 2. Kòk ole A not completely ripened (hardened)
coconut. The milk in it makes a delightful
beverage. “Ole” means that a fruit is not yet
ripe. 3. (fig) Green (inexperienced).
oliv la n Olive*. Luil doliv Olive oil.
òlòj la n Clock. V pandil.
òloje a n Watch repairman, clock repairman.
ololoy interj Wow!
òlrayt O.K. All right*.
òltègèt Go away! Get lost!
olye conj In stead of, in place of. Olye li travay
tankou Franswa, l’ap koze Instead of working like
Francis, he is chatting.
òm V nonm
oma V roma
omlèt la, lonmlèt, lanmilèt n Omelet*.
omwen, omwens At least.
on V yon
òn V lonn
onbrèl la n Parasol.
O 140
onè a, lonnè, onnè n Honor*; (Used also as a
greeting before entering. The answer is usually
respè.)
onèkte V onètte
òneman an n Ornament*.
onèt, onnèt attrib Honest*, upright, honorable,
polite. BEAUBRUN/A-13: Mwen se you fi onèt
I’m an honorable woman.
onètte a, onèkte n Honesty*, complaisance, politeness,
good breeding.
onivo V nivo
onjenikon V andjenikon
onnpepli Extremely. Cf. Ròdpòte.
onondipè a n Sign of the cross. (In the name of
the Father...) Lò n’ap antre legliz, nou fè onondipè
Upon entering the church, we make the sign of the
cross. (syn) sinakwa
onorab attrib Honorable*.
onore vt To honor*.
ons la n Ounce*.
onz, ronz num Eleven. In card games the knave
or jack.
opa 1. Word used in the game of marbles. 2. In
step. Mache opa To be in step.
opalè a n Loudspeaker.
operasyon an n (medical) Operation*.
operatè a n Operator* (telephone). Projectionist
(of movies).
opere vt To perform surgery, to operate*; to be
operated on, to undergo surgery. More frequently
used is “fè operasyon”.
opinyon an n Opinion*.
opital V lopital
oplita adv At the latest.
opozan an n Opponent*.
opoze (vpr) To oppose*, to be against. M’opoze’m
a sa I am opposed to that.
opozisyon an n Opposition*. Mete opozisyon To
be opposed to, to veto.
opresyon an n Asthma, breathlessness.
opwen To the point where. Also: opwenke.
òr conj Now, but, well. The r is pronounced by
careful speakers for purposes of clarity or em-
phasis.
oran Fresh, bold.
orespè, orespe “Excuse my French”, with due
respect*.
orevwa Goodbye, “bye bye”. Di orevwa To bid
farewell.
orezon an n Prayer. Di orezon Say a prayer.
ose, rose vt Ose zepòl To shrug one’s shoulders.
osekou interj Help! V anmwe.
oserye adv Seriously. Pran... oserye To take...
seriously.
osijède conj About, concerning.
osinon, osnon conj Or, or rather, or at least,
otherwise.
ositou conj As a matter of fact, furthermore,
well, therefore, thus, also*.
oslè a, zosle n Jacks (Goat knee bone used in
children’s game). Jwèt osle Knuckle bone game.
osnon V osinon
osti V losti
ostre attrib 1. Haughty, high-hat. 2. Angry, mad.
oswa 1
conj Or, or rather.
oswa 2
Yè oswa Last night.
otan 1
1. That’s enough. 2. As you were (milit).
otan 2
As much as, as. Otan... otan As... as. Otan
li gen lajan, se otan li mechan He is as bad as he is
rich.
otantik attrib Real, genuine, authentic*.
ote V rote
otè 1
a, lotè n 1. Author*. Ki otè liv sa a? Who’s
the author of that book? 2. Cause. Se li ki lotè sa
He’s responsible for that.
otè 2
a, rotè, wotè, larotè n 1. Height. 2. High
place. Moun ki ret nan otè People who live on the
hills.
otèl la, lotèl n Hotel*.
oto a n Car, auto*, vehicle, automobile*.
otobis la Bus*.
òtograf la n Spelling.
òtolan an, zòtolan, zètolan n Meadow lark,
garden bunting, bobolink. Common ground
dove bobolink (Columbina passerina).
otomatik attrib Automatic*.
otomobil la n Automobile*, car.
otòn nan n Autumn*, fall.
otopsi a, topsi n Autopsy*.
otorite a, lotorite n Authority*, official authorities*;
armed officials. Te gen anpil otorite lan seremoni
an There were many government officials present at
the ceremony.
otorizasyon an n Authorization*, permission.
141 P
otorize vt To authorize*.
otreman adv Otherwise.
ou 1
pers pron You, yourself, one. Unlike E.
“You”, which is plural in form but may be used
to address one or more persons, ou is used
when addressing one person only. Ou menm
You, yourself. As E. ‘you’, ‘ou’ can be used to
mean ‘one’ (Fr. on, It. uom, Germ. man, etc.)
“Ba ou” “to you” is often written barou. M’ba
ou chemiz la. Ou pa pran’l. Poukisa? I give you
the shirt, and you don’t take it, why? M’pap bliye,
m’ap pote kòb la pou ou I won’t forget; I’ll bring
the money for you. ‘Wou’ and ‘w’ are variants of
‘ou’.
ou 2
poss adj Your (second pers. sing). Lajan ou
Your money. Also: lajan’w.
ou 3
, oubyen, ouswa conj Or, (or) rather; ou ...
ou Either ... or. Ou byen Or else, or rather. Ou
byen ... ou byen either ... or.
oubli a n Oversight.
oubyen V ou
oumenm pers pron You, yourself.
oundjenikon V andjenikon
oungan an, houngan, rougan, gangan, ngan, ngangan
n Vodou priest who is sometimes also a
magician or physician. MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-
28: M’pral pale gangan’m pou yo I’m going to
complain to my houngan about them. African word.
oungfò a, hounfò n Vodou temple or shrine.
oungsi a, onsi, hounsi n Female apprentice or
consecrated assistant to the Vodou priest (houn-
gan).
oungsi bosal, hounsi bosal n The lowest grade
of the hounsi (COURLANDER).
oungsi kanzo n The highest grade of the hounsi.
ouswa V ou
out, daou (pop) n August*.
ouvè vt To open. V ouvri. Ouvè jeografi a nan
paj twa Open the geography book on page 3. attrib
1. Overly frank and above board. 2. Fresh, impertinent.
Sa’k fè ou ouvè konsa? Why are you so
fresh?
ouvèti a n Opening.
ouvri, louvri vt To open, to unlock, to turn on.
Ti zèl yo louvri Their wings spread. Depi jou te
louvri Since sunrise. V ouvè.
ouvriye a n Workman.
ovèròl la, ovèòl n Overhaul* (car, motor).
ozabwa attrib Desperate, troubled.
ozanj, ozany attrib Ultra happy, in heaven, over-
joyed.
oze vi To dare. M’pa oze di’l sa I don’t dare tell
him that.
ozetazini In the U.S.A.
P
pa 1
prep By, per, from. Youn pa youn One by
one. Pa aksidan By chance. Aprann pa kè To
learn by heart. Pa dèyè From behind. De pa de
Two by two. Pa bak Backwards. From Fr. par.
pa 2
That of, the one of, the property of. “Pa”
helps to form the emphatic possessive adjective
and the possessive pronouns. Pa mwen; pa’m
My; mine. Pa ou Your; thine, yours. Pa li, pa’l
His, her, its; his, hers. Pa nou, pa’n Our; ours.
Your, yours (plur). Pa yo Their; theirs. Soulye
pa’m My own shoes. Ban’m pa’m san dous Don’t
put any sugar in mine. Se pa nou li ye It’s ours.
From Fr. part.
pa 3
Fè pa To give a chance, to concede a favor, to
have compassion for. Fè pa’m Give me a chance.
Isit nan pwen moun pa Around here there is no
favoritism. Menm lan lanfè gen moun pa Even in
Hell you’ll find people on your side (partisan). L’ap
pase pa’l He’s having his troubles. From Fr. part.
pa 4
interj Sometimes “pa” has the same meaning
as “apa, “nèspa”, “se pa”. Ki bò ou aprann sa?
Pa ou ki te di’m sa! Where did you learn that?
Was it not you who told me that! Pa vre? Is it not
true? Is it not so? Pa pito Wouldn’t it be better
to...; What if..., And if... Pa pito n’ale? Wouldn’t
it be better if we go away?
pa 5
adv Not, do not, does not, don’t. Pa ditou
Not at all. Pa di = pa vle di Does not mean. Pa
janm Never. Li pa ri He does not laugh. From
Fr. pas.
pa 6
a n Step. Pazapa Step by step, slowly. M’pa
vle wè’l (a) de pa I have a strong dislike for him.
Pandan l’ap danse li pèdi pa He got out of step
while dancing. Mache opa To be in steps. From
Fr. pas.
pacha a, bacha n An important peasant, a wealthy
landowner. Cf. E. Pasha*. V don.
pachat la n Escapade.
pachiman vt To ruin, to make a mess of, to
botch. Ruined, in bad shape.
padesi a, padsi n Raincoat, overcoat.
padon an n Pardon*, forgiveness. Mande padon
To excuse one’s self, to ask for forgiveness.
padonab, padonnab attrib Pardonable*.
padonnen, padònen vt To pardon*, to forgive.
pafè attrib Perfect*.
P 142
pafen an n Perfume*. V losyon, odè.
pafouten an n Whiskers, sideburns.
pafwa adv Sometimes, occasionally, from time
to time.
paj la n Page*. Li alapaj He’s up to date.
Pak 1
la n Easter.
pak 2
la n Pigsty, corral, playpen, park*. Pak
kochon Pigpen. Pak chwal Horse stable. Pakanpak
Thru and thru. Bal la travèse pyebwa a pakanpak
The bullet went thru the tree from one side to the
other.
pake 1
a, pakè n Package*, parcel. Faktè a pote
you pake pou ou The mailman brought a package
for you.
pake 2
vt & vi To park* (a car).
pakèt la n Package*, parcel, bundle. Pa pakèt
In bundles. Yon pakèt A great deal of. Yon pakèt
moun A large number of people. Mare pakèt ou
Pack up (and go). Cf. pake.
pakin nan n Parking*.
pako V poko
pakoti a n Cheap wares. Fè pakoti To deal in
goods of inferior quality.
pal attrib Pale*. You ble pal A pale blue.
palab la n Conversation, chatter, endless talk.
palabrè a n Chatterbox, big talker.
paladò a n Talker, prattler. (adj) Talkative.
palan an n Slaughterhouse. Cf. labatwa.
palavire a n Slap; a box in the ear. Pèdi palavire
To dare, to forget one’s self (and do something).
pale vt 1. To talk, to speak, to chat, to utter.
2. To warn. vi 1. To speak. 2. To be of importance,
consequence. Cf. E. Money talks. Examples
and expressions: Se pa pale That’s for
real. Don’t even talk about it. That‘s for sure.
Apa ou pa pale ankò? Why are you silent? Pale
moun mal To speak evil (behind people’s back).
Pale pou To tell on. Pale nan zòrèy To whisper in
someone’s ear. Pale sou lang To lisp.
palè 1
a n Palace*. Very big house. Residence
of the president of Haiti. Kay sa a se you palè
That house is a mansion (large and sumptuous).
palè 2
a n Talker.
palèt 1
la n Palate*.
palèt 2
la n 1. Thigh (of pig, sheep etc.) 2. Long
wooden scoop (spoon) used to stir pots. 3. A
noise-making device made of paper glued to the
string of a Haitian kite which vibrates when the
kite is flying.
palfwenye a n Vagrant, vagabond, low-class.
pali vi To turn pale*.
palidis la n Malaria.
palisad la n Wooden barrier or fence; wall.
palmante vi To discuss, to parley*.
palmaskriti a n Palma Christi*, palm-oil.
palmis la n Royal palm* tree. Roystonea regia
Cook. Chou palmis = Kè palmis Stem, stalk of the
palm tree. Fèy palmis Palm leaves. “Palmis” ou
“Tonton Nò”? Heads or tails? (On one side of
many Haitian coins, one finds the head of President
Nord Alexis, popularly called “Tonton Nò”). Zwazo
palmis Type of bird living in palm trees.
palpitasyon an n Li gen palpitasyon He has an
abnormal noisy heart beat.
palto a n Coat, jacket. V levit, vès.
pambitch, panmbitch n Palm Beach*, cloth,
material.
pami, nanpami prep Among, amid, amidst, in
the midst. V nan mitan.
pan 1
an n Peacock.
pan 2
an n Side of a bed frame.
pàn nan n Breakdown, defect, disability. Pran
pàn To have a breakdown (machine). Oto’m an
pàn I have car trouble. Leve pàn To fix the
trouble, to get started after a breakdown. Nou pran
pàn gaz We’re out of gas. Pàn kaotchou Flat tire.
panama a, palama a n Panama* (hat), straw hat.
panari a, pannari a n Whitlow, felon (inflammation
of a finger, a toe, etc.).
panche vt & vi To lean (over).
pandan, pannan conj While; prep During.
pandil la n Clock. V òlòj.
pandye vi To hang, to suspend*, to dangle. Rete
pandye nan bouch yon moun To listen to s.o.’s
speech with undivided attention.
panik la n Panic*.
pankat la n Placard, sign, poster.
panko V poko
panmen vi To have spasms*, to faint.
pann nan 1
n Belly, stomach (of cow, pig, etc.).
pann 2
vt & refl To hang, to hang up. Legliz pa
chante lantèman you moun ki pann tèt li The church
will not celebrate the last rites of a person who
hanged himself.
pannan V pandan
Pannkòt n Pentecost*.
pano a, panno a n 1. Wall of a house. 2. Rudimentary
substitute saddle made of straw or dried
banana leaves. Apik panno Very steep.
143 P
panpan Fè gran panpan To be a big show-off, to act
as a big shot.
pans la n Belly, stomach, gut, paunch*.
panse 1
vi To think, to believe, to conceive.
panse 2
vt To dress (a wound).
pansman an n Grooming; dressing down; what
you put on the wound to help it heal.
pansyon an n 1. Lodgings, boarding house. Li
an pansyon He’s in a boarding house. 2. Pension*
(retirement).
pansyonè a n Boarder (in a school).
pant la n Slope. File you move pant To be on a
bad course (track).
pantalèt la n Panties* (for women). (syn) kilòt.
pantalon an n Pants*, trousers, breeches. Janm
pantalon Trousers leg. V kanson.
pantan attrib Startled; stupefied, surprised. V sezi.
M’tap fè you ti kabicha, li fè’m pantan I was
taking a little snooze when he startled me. M’al
pantan sou li I was startled to meet him unexpectedly.
panten an n Puppet, insignificant person.
panti a n Iron brace of a door (hinge).
pantouf la n Slipper. Pantouf espion (Soft)
slippers made of one piece of leather and blue
denim material.
pantoufouye a n Type of aggressive shark.
pàntyè a n Cupboard. Cf. E. pantry*.
pànye a, panyen an n Basket, hamper; nest-box.
Cf. E. Pannier*.
panyòl la n Of the Dominican Republic; Spanish*;
Spaniard*. Nan panyòl Land where Spanish is
spoken. Usually refers to the Dominican Republic.
Gen panyòl nan kay la Hush! The person we’re
talking about is here. Watch what you’re saying.
The expression “ir al Francé”, for “to the Western
part of the Island, i.e. Haiti”, is quoted by Carlos
Esteban Deive in “Vodu y Magia en Santo Domingo”,
page 387.
panzou a n 1. Slap on the hand in a children’s
game called “koupe panzou”. “Bay panzou”
means to give a slap on the hand to cause what’s
in it to fall; also to bring about a coup d’etat.
2. Vetch (or) tare (small plant of the bean family).
pap 1
Contraction of pa + ap = Am not, is not,
are not; shall not, will not, won’t.
pap 2
la n Pope*. Pap seyè Potentate. Li se sèl
pap lan kay la He is the dominant (main) figure in
the house.
pap 3
sis Not to succeed, to fail. Ou pap sis
You’ll not succeed.
papa a n 1. Dad, daddy, father, progenitor. Title
of respect. Papa*. Papa’m ak manman’m My
parents. Papa! (May be used as an exclamation
of amazement). 2. Type of large drum (COURLANDER).
3. Just as “manman”, “papa” may
serve as an augmentative prefix before some
nouns. The word then means ‘huge’.
papalwa a n Vodou priest. Same as oungan.
From the Yoruba word ‘babalao’ (COURLAND-
ER).
papay la n Papaya*.
papi, papit n Dad, daddy.
papiyon an n Butterfly, moth.
papiyòt la n Paper roller, curler. Cf. bigoudi.
papòt la n Threshold (of a door). Doorstep.
papou attrib Refers to one who needs a haircut
badly. Ou trò papou, al kay kwafè You need a
haircut; go to the barber shop.
papye a n Paper*; paper money; official legal
papers*. Papye sable Sandpaper. Papye tè Land
title, title to real estate. Papye tenbre Special type of
stamped, sealed paper used for official government
documents. Pase papye To sign a legal instrument
such as a marriage certificate, a deed.
parabòl la n Parable*. Pale an parabòl To beat
around the bush; to speak indirectly. V paroli.
parachit la n Parachute*.
parad la, laparad n Parade*.
paradi a n Heaven, paradise*.
paraj la n Neighborhood, place; vicinity.
paralize vi To paralyze*; paralyzed*.
paralizi a n Paralysis*.
paran an n Relative, kin; (rarely) parent*(s).
parantay la n Family, relatives.
parapli a n Umbrella.
parapò, parapòt prep Because of.
parasòl la n Parasol*, umbrella.
paravan an n Screen, folding-screen.
parazit la n Parasite*.
pare vt 1. To ward off, to face, to extend. Cf. E.
Parry*. 2. To prepare, get ready. Examples and
expressions: Pare (you) kou To ward off a blow.
Pare lapli To take shelter; to take cover from the
rain. Tan an pare It is threatening to rain. Pare
men ou Extend your hand. Pare lajan ou Get your
money ready. Li pare He is ready.
parenn nan n Godfather; best man (at a wedding).
parès la n Laziness.
parese attrib Lazy, idle. V paresèz.
paresèz attrib Lazy (applied to females). Paresèz
kon chat plenn Lazy as hell.
P 144
paresol, parasòl n White manjack. Cordia sulcata
DC.
parespre adv On purpose. V espre.
parèt vi To appear*, to seem; to show one’s self,
to come on. Li pa parèt tèt li He did not show.
parèy Such a ...; similar, like. Li pa mantè parèy
ou He’s not a liar like you. San parèy Unmatched.
CELESTIN-MEGIE/1-154: Yon kòkraz san parèy.
parèyman adv Likewise, the same to you (as an
answer to “best wishes”). Menmman parèyman
It’s the very same thing.
pari a n Bet. Cf. E. pari* mutuel betting.
V paryaj.
Pari n Paris*.
parokèt la, pèrokèt n Type of bright colored
fish.
paròl la n Words, saying, statement, talk; sentence;
speech. Paròl is also a Vodou term. M’pa gen
de paròl I’m not two-faced. I keep my promises.
Paròl granmoun lontan The sayings of long ago.
The wisdom of the ages. V laparòl.
paroli, pawoli n Parable*. Pale an paroli To
speak in parables.
parwas la, pawas n Parish*.
paryaj la n Bet. More pop. for pari.
parye vi & vt To bet.
pas 1
la n 1. Pass* (in sports, at cards). 2. Ford,
passage* way. (fig) Situation, difficulty. Cf. E.
He has come to a pretty pass*. L’ap pase yon pas
(or) Li tonbe lan you pas He’s in a bad situation.
pas 2
Granted. Pas pou de, men twa, se tròp I’ll
concede you two , but three is too much.
pasab attrib Passable*, so so. Sa a manyè pasab
At least this one will do.
pasaj la, pasay n 1. Misery, annoyance; tribulation.
2. Passage*, passageway. V traka. Ala pasay pou
moun kokobe What trials and tribulations the poor
cripples go through. Pasaj dalyans A method for
divining a guilty person by means of a ring suspended
on a string (COURLANDER). Pitit la lan pasay
The baby is coming out (is being born).
pasaje a, pasajè n Passenger*; fare.
pasan an n Loop (in trousers to hold the belt).
pase 1
vt 1. To pass*. 2. To lay, to put. Pase
men’w sou zepòl mwen Lay your hand on my shoulder.
3. To take effect (laxative). 4. To iron (clothes,
hair). 5. Pase maladi To experience a sickness.
6. Pase bè sou pen To butter one’s bread. 7. To
befall. 8. To sift, to sieve. 9. To give, to administer
( a beating). 10. To show (a movie). vi 1. To
pass, to go through. 2. To die. 3. To pass*
(card game, sports). 4. To succeed (at an exam).
5. To occur, to come about, to happen. 6. To
pass* by, to stop by, to go by. Examples and
expressions: Pase chaple To say the rosary. Pase
cheve To curl (do one’s hair with a hot instrument).
Pase mizè To suffer from bad treatment or from
poverty. To have a hard time. Sa kap pase? What
is going on? Sa’k pase’l? What has happened to
him? Pase nan betiz To make fun of, to ridicule.
Pase pou To pass for. Yo tèlman sanble, youn kab
pase pou lòt They resemble each other so much, that
one can pass for the other. Dlo sèlman ki pou fè
swaf mwen pase Only water will quench my thirst.
Maladi a poko pase The sickness is not over. Pase
sou sa Disregard that, pass over that. Medsin nan
poko pase’l The laxative hasn’t taken effect yet.
M’te grangou talè a; konnyea grangou a pase I was
hungry a moment ago; now I’m not hungry anymore.
L’ap pase pa’l He’s having his troubles. Lagè sivil
ameriken se you bagay ki pase lontan The American
Civil War took place many years ago. Oto a pase
sou li The car ran over him. M’a pase wè ou a
midi I’ll stop by to see you at noon. Pase twal
mouye To mop, to dust with a wet towel. Nou pase
kondisyon We came to an agreement under specific
conditions. Nouris la tèlman fè kolè, lèt pase’l lan
san The nursing mother was so angry, that the
breast milk got into her blood. Pase bale 1. A
method for divining a guilty person by the use of a
specially prepared chair (COURLANDER). 2. To
sweep.
pase 2
Past*, last. Mwa pase Last month.
pase 3
conj 1. Than, more than; instead of. Pi ...
pase (or) pli ... pase More ... than. M’gran pase
ou I am older than you. Li gen senkant an pase He
is more than fifty years old. 2. For, because. Pase
pou Instead of, rather than.
pase 4
V paske
pasipala adv Here and there.
paske, pase conj Because.
paspatou a n Passkey*.
paspò a n Passport*.
paspouki Fè paspouki To play favorites. M’ap trete
tout kandida yo menm jan; m’pap fè paspouki pou
pèsonn I’m going to treat all applicants in the same
fashion. I’ll do no special favors.
pastè a n Parson, pastor*, (Protestant) minister.
paswa a n Strainer, sieve, colander.
pasyan attrib Patient*.
pasyans la n Patience*.
pasyante vi To be patient*. To wait patiently*.
pasyon an n Passion*. Pale san pasyon To speak
impartially.
pat 1
la n Paw, foot; hand (of a banana stalk).
Li mete pat men li sou tab la He puts his great big
hand on the table. Grese pat To grease the palm
(to bribe). Pat men Large hand, hand. Pat pye
(or) Pat zago Big foot. Bay you moun yon pat
gagann To grab s.o. by the throat. Cf. lapat.
145 P
pat 2
la n 1. Dough. 2. Shoe polish (Paste*).
3. Pat tomat la Tomato paste*. 4. (attrib) Thick.
Labouyi mayi a pat The corn porridge is thick.
pat 3
, pat pou pat Even. Nou pat pou pat We are
even.
pat 4
Did not. Contraction of pa + te. Auxiliary
of the negative past. Li pat vini He did not come.
pataje vt To share, to divide.
patans la n Departure*. An patans About to
depart, outward bound. Bato a an patans The ship
is about to depart. Lalin an patans The moon is
waning.
patant la n License, permit. Cf. E. patent*.
pataswèl la n Slap, blow. Nan goumen Jak pran
you pataswèl nan figi li ki fè’l pa wè pandan yon
moman While fighting, Jack received a blow which
temporarily blinded him. Sp.
patat la n Sweet potato* Patat blanch White
potatoes, as opposed to patat jòn. Patat peze Fried,
pressed sweet potatoes. Gro patat, patat si Fat
person. Pen patat Type of sweet potato cake. Patat
jòn Yam (sweet potato, orange colored)
patati patata (onom) And so on, and on.
patch la n Patch* (on a tire tube).
patche vt To patch* (tire tube).
pate a n Patty*, pastry*, meat pie.
patekwè a n Parvenu (one who did not think
that he would reach such heights). Also said
about s.o. who is boasting about some new ac-
quisition.
paten an n Skate, roller-skate. Monte paten To
skate.
pati 1
a n 1. Part*, bit, portion. Fè pati To
belong, to take part in. 2. Male organ, genitals.
3. Game. 4. Yon pati Some, a group of.
pati 2
vi To depart*, to leave, to go away, to get
away; to go off. M’tande you rèl pati I heard a
cry. Revolvè a pati The gun went off. Kò’l pati
kochi His body was tilting. Tèt li pati He went
crazy.
patinaj la, patinay n Skidding. Oto a fè patinaj
nan labou a, li pa ka kontinue The car is skidding
in the mud, and it can’t move ahead.
patinen vi To slide, to skid. vt To handle too
much. Ase patinen vyann nan Don’t touch the meat
so much.
patipri a, pati pri n Partiality*. Pa fè patipri
Don’t take sides. Don’t play favorites.
patiray la n Pasture*.
patisipe vi To participate*, to take part, to partake.
patisri a n Pastry*.
patizan an n Follower, disciple. Partisan*.
patko V poko
patoje vi To wallow, to splash and flounder (in
puddles, mud, etc.). Patoje nan labou To splash
and wallow in mud.
patouy V patrouy
patri a, lapatri n Fatherland, nation.
patriyòt la n Patriot*.
patron an n 1. Employer, boss. 2. Pattern* (sewing).
3. Patron* saint.
patrouy la, patouy n Patrol*. Fè patrouy To
patrol*.
paveni an n Newly-rich.
paviyon an n Flag; the court of the hounfo
(COURLANDER). Cf E. pavillion*.
paweze vi To parade.
pawoli V paroli
pay 1
la n 1. Chaff; straw, any dry combustible
plant. 2. Misery, trouble. Pay chapo Straw for
making hats. You sak pay A mattress made of
straw. You kay pay A straw house.
pay 2
attrib Very light.
payas la n Straw mattress. Cf. pagliaccio*.
payaya a n Worthless, insignificant person.
paydefè a n Steel wool.
paye V anpaye
payen an n Pagan*.
payèt la n Spangle, paillette*. Bay payèt To show
off to someone else.
pazyal la n Fè yon pazyal To take a walk. Cf. Sp.
Pasear, Dominican dialect pazial.
pe 1
a n Altar in a Vodou temple.
pe 2
To shut up, to be quiet, to hush. Pe bouch ou
Shut your mouth. Pe la! Shut up!
pe 3
“Pe” is an auxiliary form of the progressive
present used in the South. Elsewhere ap, ape.
pe 4
pa Cannot, can’t. One of the rare cases in
which “pa” follows the verb.
pè 1
a, lapè n Peace*. An pè In peace. Kite’l an
pè (or) Kite’l trankil Leave him alone.
pè 2
a, lapè n Pair*, couple. Lapè pijon vann you
dola A pair of pigeons sells for a dollar.
pè 3
a, monpè n Priest, clergyman. Pè savann
Bush priest. Pèdfami Father of a family. Pè
Letènèl n God.
pè 4
vt To fear, to dread. vi To be afraid, to be
scared. Fè pè To frighten (s.o.). Li pa pè pap He
fears nobody. Li pè kon chat He is scared as a cat.
pè 5
savann n Bush priest.
P 146
peape V pezape
pèch 1
la n Peach*. Pye pèch Peach* tree.
pèch 2
V lapèch
peche 1
a n Sin. Fè peche To commit a sin.
peche 2
vt & vi To fish.
pechè a n 1. Fisherman. 2. Sinner.
pechinen, penchennen vt To pinch*. V penche,
pichkannen.
pèd la n Loss. (variant of pèt 2
). Ou lan pèd
You lost.
pedal la n Pedal*.
pedale vi To pedal*.
pedan attrib Pedant*, vain, pretentious braggart,
show-off.
pèdi vt To lose. To be lost. Pèdi pa To slip.
Pèdi pye a) To lose one’s footing in deep water. b)
To lose one’s social position, or influence. Pèdi ròl
To act in an unbecoming manner. Yon granmoun
ki goumen ak timoun pèdi ròl li When an adult
fights with a child, he is out of place. Pèdi konesans
To lose consciousness. Pèdi bann a) To become
impotent. b) To be out of place, out of one’s element.
pèdisyon an n 1. Amenorrhea (loss of menstruation).
2. Debauchery. Fi a (tonbe) lan pèdisyon
The woman has become a whore; she is leading a life
of debauchery.
pèdri a n Partridge*.
pèfid attrib Treacherous, deceiving.
pèkal la n Type of material; cambric, muslin,
percale*.
pèkseswa V kikseswa
pektoro a, pekto n Pectoral* (chest muscle).
pèl 1
la n Pearl*. You bèl kolye pèl A beautiful
string of pearls.
pèl 2
la n Shovel, spade. You pèl dan A large
tooth.
pela attrib Bald, with a shaven head (applied to
cocks). From Spanish pelado.
pèlen an n Snare, trap. Pèlen tèt A trap with a
noose. “Pèlen Tèt”, a play by Franké-tienne.
pèlenpenpen V grenn
pelerinaj la, pelerinay n Pilgrimage*.
pèlren an n Pilgrim*.
peman an n Payment*. Jodi a se jou peman
Today is payday.
pèmèt vt To permit*, to enable, to allow, to let.
(vpr) To dare, to have the audacity to. Apre
sa’k pase a, kouman ou fè pèmèt ou vini isit ankò?
After what happened, how did you dare come here
again? Radyès pèmèt Shameless insolence.
pèmisyon an n Permission*.
pen 1
an n Bread. Pen griye Toast. Pen mayi
Corncake. Pen patat Type of sweet potato cake.
pen 2
an n Pine*. Pinus occidentalis L. Bwa pen
Pine wood.
penalite a n Penalty* (in soccer).
penba Manman penba Sly, malicious woman.
penbèch attrib Frivolous, a woman with easy
morals.
pench 1
la n Pinch*.
pench 2
la n Children’s game played with pebbles
or bones in which the winner pinches the loser
saying “Pismiding dira mon konpè chapon, roti,
beka, bakasin, ponn pongonn, al ponn” (MANGO
DYESIFÒ, Haiti Progrès, October 8, 1986).
penche, pencheng vt To pinch*. V pechinen.
penchennen V pechinen
penda n Loose, frivolous woman.
peng attrib Stingy, tight-fisted, avaricious. V ava,
chich, kras.
pengwen an n Penguin* plant, wild pine. Bromelia.
Zannana kon pengwen Each and everyone, haphazardly;
tutti quanti.
penib attrib Painful*.
penich la n (Penny), pennies*. M’pa gen yon
penich I am broke, penniless.
penisilin nan, pelisilin n Penicillin*.
penitans la n Penance*, penitence*. Also Vodou
term.
penje a n A form of wrestling that is seen at
Rara time (COURLANDER).
penkle V pentle
penn vt To paint*.
penntiklous la n Parasite.
penpan V anpenpan
penpennen vi To struggle (barely making a
living).
pens la n 1. Tongs, pincers*, pliers. Travay la
difisil anpil; se pens ak pikwa This job is very hard
work. 2. Bobby pin, clothes pin; hair pin. 3. Tuck
(in sewing).
pense 1
a n A pinch* (a small amount that you
can hold between two fingers).
pense 2
, penche Children’s game in which winners
pinch losers. V pench.
pensèt la n Small pincers*, tongs, tweezers.
penso a n Paint brush.
pent 1
la n Painter*.
147 P
pent 2
la n Pint* (measure).
pent 3
attrib Mottled, speckled, a type of color.
Kòk pent Speckled rooster.
pentad la n Guinea-hen, Guinea-fowl. (fig) Shy
and cowardly.
pentadin nan n A crossing between a hen and a
Guinea-fowl.
penti a n Paint*; painting*. Se papa’l an penti He
is a spitting image of his father. (syn) Se papa’l
krache.
pentire vt To paint*, to color.
pentle, penkle attrib Of various colors. Kok
pentle Rooster of various colors.
peny nan n Comb.
penyen vt & vi To comb (one’s self). Penyen
lage a. To let one’s hair down. b. To become
negligent, to abandon one’s self. (Usually applied
to women who have abandoned themselves to
loose morals).
pèp la n People*, populace*.
pepe Bon pepe He who pays his debts regularly.
pèpèt 1
la, pètpèt, pèt n Fart. Pèpèt mayi a
Popcorn.
pèpèt 2
vi To fart. Also pete.
pepinyè a n Nursery (hort).
peple vi To reproduce, to beget children, to
populate*.
pere, pèrèz attrib Shy (animal), timid, fearful.
pèrèz la, laperèz n Fear, phobia.
peri vi To perish*, to be destroyed, to be killed.
Dènye sòlda yo peri nan batay la Every single
soldier died in that battle. Tout machandiz yo peri
nan batiman ki koule a All merchandise was lost in
the boat that sank. M’ap peri, mwen sou kont ou
Things are really bad, I am in your hands. I am
counting on you for help.
perik la n Wig. Also fo cheve.
peripesi a n Hardship.
peristil la, perestil n The roofed court of the
hounfò (COURLANDER).
pèrokèt V parokèt
peròl la n Payroll*.
peron an n Stoop (floor of a porch). Pòv yo
chita sou peron legliz la The poor sit on the church
steps.
peryòd la n Period* (time, menstruation). Ou
vin nan you move peryòd You came at a bad time.
pès la n Malicious (person). Pest*. V lapès.
pèse vt To pierce*, to penetrate; to bore, to drill
(hole). Pèse zòrèy To pierce one’s ears. vi 1. To
become noticeable, to be on the way up. Nèg sa
a pa vle wè nèg pèse This man does not like to see
another man make progress. 2. To appear, to arrive.
Solèy la pèse The sun appeared.
pèsekisyon an n Persecution*.
pèsekite vt To persecute*.
pèseptè a n Tax collector.
pèsi a n Parsley*. Petroselinum sativum Hoffm.
pèsistan attrib Stubborn, insistent, persistent*.
pèsistans la n Persistence*. Ak pèsistans Persis-
tently*.
pèsiste V To persist*.
pèsòn n Person*. Se you bòn pèsòn She is
good-natured. An pèsòn Personally.
pèsonaj la, pèsonnay n An elderly person* of
distinction, personage*.
pèsonalite a n Personality*. Li san pèsonalite He
has no personality. He is a weak character.
pèsonèl attrib Personal*. Egotistical.
pèsonn 1
indef adj No, not any (human being).
Pèsonn moun Not a soul, nobody.
pèsonn 2
indef pron Nobody, anybody; no person*.
Pa pèsonn No one. M’ale lòt bò a m’frape pòt la,
pèsonn pa reponn I went to the other side, I knocked
on the door, nobody answered.
pèsonnay V pèsonaj
pèsuade, pèswade vt To persuade*, to convince.
pèsyèn nan, plasyèn n Venetian blind.
pèt 1
la V pèpèt la
pèt 2
la, pèd n Loss. M’fè pèt I lost money (on the
deal).
pèt 3
Nothing, not at all. Li pa pèt doktè He is no
physician at all. M’pap ba’l pèt I will give him
nothing.
peta a n Fire-cracker, petard*. Se pa peta! It is
no trifling matter! How nice! Wow! Tire peta To
shoot fire-crackers.
petadò a n A person who farts often.
petas tisale a n Salt pork.
pete vt 1. To break. 2. To flatter, to fool, to
cheat, to deceive. vi 1. To burst out ... (doing
something), to start. Pete danse To start dancing.
2. To fart. 3. To burst, to explode, to break.
Examples and expressions: Pete fyèl To crush
(s.o.), to kill. Pa pete fyèl ou lan travay Do not kill
yourself by working too hard. Kòd la pete The rope
broke. Pete achtè To cheat a purchaser. Je pete
Blind person. Pete moun nan jwèt To cheat at
games. Pete kriye To burst into tears. Pete kou To
break one’s neck. Pete je To cause s.o. to become
blind.
P 148
petè a n Inveigler; one who lies convincingly.
petèt adv Perhaps, maybe. San di petèt Without a
doubt, most certainly.
petevi a n Weakling, sickly; completely lacking
in energy. Sa’l sanble? L’ap mache tankou you
petevi Look at that man? He looks like he is going
to fall any minute.
petren an n 1. Dough (bread). 2. An embarrassing
situation.
petri vt To knead, to squeeze.
petro n Type of Vodou rite; dance rhythm.
V rada, kongo.
pèvès attrib Perverse*.
pèvèsyon an n Perversion*.
pèvèti vt To corrupt, to pervert*.
pèy la n Pay*, wage. Li se move pèy He is a bad
pay; he does not pay his debts.
peye vt & vi To pay*. L’a peye ou lè poul fè dan
He will pay you when a hen grows teeth, i.e. never.
Fè peye tròp To overcharge. Fè peye To charge.
Peye tròp To overpay.
peyè a n Payer*.
peyi a n Country, district, region, fatherland.
Nan peyi pèdi In the (uncivilized) wilderness. Peyi
frèt All is calm. Se moun peyi’m He is my countryman.
Peyi san chapo Land of the dead. As an adj. it
means ‘domestic’ as opposed to foreign. Diri
peyi Domestic rice.
peyizan an n Peasant*, farmer (Rare). The
common word is abitan.
pèz la n 1. Weight. 2. Scale.
pezape, peape Little by little.
peze vt 1. To weigh; to squeeze; to press. 2. To
hold down. Ou se moun mwen epi ou ap peze’m
After all, you are my friend; and still, you are going
against me. Bannann peze Pressed, fried bananas.
vi To weigh; to be heavy. Peze lou To be heavy.
“Peze” sometimes is used in conjunction with
another verb to indicate continuous effort or
ardor in performing the action mentioned in
that other verb. Peze desann To hurry down.
Peze monte To hurry upwards.
pezib attrib Peaceful*.
pèzlèt la n Milk-tester (instrument).
pi 1
a n Pus*.
pi 2
attrib Pure*.
pi 3
V pui
pi 4
, pli adv More. ‘Pi’ is used pretonically and
usually precedes an adjective or an adverb. Ban’m
youn ki pi chè Give me one that is more expensive.
An’n ale pi lwen Let us go farther. Liv ou a pi gro
pase pa’m nan Your book is bigger than mine. Pi
bon Better. Pi mal Worse.
pi 5
adv Most, the most. Se li ki pi entelijan lan
tout He is the most intelligent of all of them.
piblik attrib Public*, official. Word identifying
taxis.
piblisite a n Publicity*.
pibliye vt To publish*, to make public.
pichkannen, piskannen, piskanyen vt To pinch*.
Ti Jan piskannen Mari nan bra Johnny pinched
Mary on the arm. Cf. pechinen.
pichon an n 1. Aphids, mite (plant disease).
2. (fig) Bad luck. V devenn.
pichpich Li gen je pichpich His eyes are usually
seen almost closed, as if squinting.
pidè a n San pidè Shameless.
pidemi V epidemi
pifò Most, the majority.
piga 1
, pinga (Negative auxiliary of the imperative)
Don’t, be careful not to... Pinga ou bwè tafia Do
not drink liquor. Ou di fi a move paròl. Pinga!
You said bad words to the girl. Don’t. Beware!
piga 2
, pinga Watch out for, look out for. Pinga
jandam Watch out for the police. Pinga pikan Be
careful of the thorns. Mete (you moun) sou pinga’l
To give (s.o.) a warning. Cf. prigad.
pigaseren an n Type of poison which is supposed
to take effect in case the person who has taken it
goes out at night (folklore).
pij la n Laxative. (Rare) Usual word is “medsin”.
pijama a n Pijama*.
pije 1
, prije vt To act as a laxative. More common
is”pase”.
pije 2 V
prije
pijon an n Pigeon*, dove. ‘Pijon’ has also the
meaning of male organ (particularly that of a
young boy), ‘birdie’.
pik 1
la n 1. Pick*, pick-axe. Pik glas Ice pick*.
2. Spade(s) (cards).
pik 2
In the expression “e pik” = - and some.
Sp.
pikan an n Thorn, bramble; stinger (of a bee);
sharp bones of fish, bristle. Pyebwa a gen pikan;
pa moute li The tree has thorns, do not climb it.
Pikan kwenna Types of common thorn.
pike 1
vt 1. To pick*; to sting, to bite (insects);
to stab, to stick, to prick; to burn (as when you
put alcohol on a wound); to make s.o. itch; to
prickle. Bab ou pike’l Your beard prickles her.
Pike yon kriz To throw a fit, to have an attack (of
anger). Vant mwen ap pike’m I feel a sharp pain
in my stomach. Pa gen plas pou pike zepeng The
149 P
place is filled to capacity. vi 1. To go into a dive
(airplane); to swoop down (sou, on). 2. To
hurry to, to go in a hurry to. M’pike kay papa’m
I hurried to my father’s house. 3. To go. Li pike
devan He went towards the front. 4. To burst out,
to start to. Timoun nan pike kriye lè li pa wè
manman’l The child started to bawl when he did
not see his mother.
pike 2
attrib 1. Hot (spiced food). 2. Worm-eaten
(fruit). 3. Decayed (teeth). 4. Yon blag pike
(or) sal A risqué story.
pikèt la n Stake. Post, picket*, a pointed wooden
or bamboo stake sharpened on one end. Also:
A piece of sharpened bamboo or hard wood;
its point is dipped into poison, and it is placed
in the ground, sharpened end up (COUR-
LANDER).
piki a n Shot, injection.
pikliz la n Hot pepper dressing. The word
comes from E. Pickles*.
pikotman an n Itch; pungent pain on the side.
pikwa a n Pick-axe*, mattock.
pil la n 1. Heap, pile*, stack. Fè pil To heap up,
to pile up, to cluster, to assemble. Yo vann sèl pa pil
They sell salt in piles. Pil sou pil Piled up. Yon
gro pil... A big pile of... Yon pil A lot of. 2. Battery
(for flashlights, toys, etc.).
pile vt To step on, to stomp on, to tread, to
trample, to crash; to pound, to grind into mortar;
to peel, husk. Toutmoun pile li atè a Everybody
stepped over him.
pilil la n Pill*.
pilon an n Mortar. Manch pilon Pestle, stamper.
pilonnen vt To stomp one’s feet on, to step on
(someone’s foot) vigorously. Cf. pile.
pilòt la n Pilot*.
pilye a n Pillar*, pole. Pilye gason = poto mitan
A big strong man.
piman an n Hot pepper, chili pepper, Cayenne
pepper, Capsicum annuum L. Piman dou Green
pepper. Other types of piman: piman bouk,
piman zwazo, piman sanba, etc.
pimantad la n Hot sauce made with hot pepper,
vinegar, etc.
pimpe vt To send, to fling. Lè ou rive lakay ou,
pimpe liv la ban mwen When you get to your house,
send me the book right away. Li pa vle travay,
mwen pimpe’l lakay li He did not want to work, so
I sent him home.
pin nan n 1. Penis (rare). 2. Pin* (motor).
pine V bwa pini
pinèz la n Bed-bug, bug.
pinga V piga
pingpong nan n Ping-pong*.
pini 1
vt 1. To punish*. 2. To dare, to defy.
pini 2
V bwa pini
pinisyon an n Punishment*.
pip la n Pipe*. Li pa vo pip tabak It is not worth
snuff.
pipi 1
a n Urine; peepee*. Blad pipi Bladder.
pipi 2
vi To urinate, to pee, to piss, to make
peepee*. Also pise, irinen, fè pipi.
pipich la n Word used by children to designate
the male organ. Birdie.
pipirit la n 1. Raft. (In the South) (In Port de
Paix, they call it “pripri” (Deita)). 2. Type of
tropical bird. Pipirit gro tèt Hispaniolan fly-catcher.
O pipirit chantan Bright and early. For other
species of ‘pipirit’, see Roger Nelson’s book.
pipit la n Penis.
pire 1
a n Puree*, mash.
pire 2
vt To squeeze (lemon, blister).
pirouli a n Lolly-pop.
pirwèt la, piwèt la n Pirouette*, turn, movement.
pirwete, piwete vi To make pirouettes*, to turn
and turn.
pis la n Flea. Long kou ke pis Just a litle bit more,
and -, by a hair’s breadth. Long kou ke pis, li tap
tonbe lan trou a He barely missed falling into that
hole.
pisannit la n One who wets his bed.
pisans V puisans
pise vi To piss*, urinate. Tèt mwen frape nan mi
an; li pise san My head banged against the wall; it
was spurting blood.
pisin nan n Swimming pool.
piske V puiske
piskèt la n Tiny fish found in some areas of
Haiti, for instance the South.
pistach la n Peanut, Arachis Hypogaea L. Pye
pistach Peanut vine. V pistach dèzend.
pistach dèzend la n Panama tree. Stereculia
apetala (Jacq.) Karst. Huge tree which produces
a nut reminding one of a peanut.
pistole a n Pistol*.
piston an n 1. Piston*. 2. Influence, pull, a
helping hand. Jak gen anpil piston Jack has many
influential people who will put in a good word for
him. V mannigèt. 3. Penis.
pistonnen vt To promote, to sponsor, to put in
a good word for.
piswa a n Urinal.
P 150
pit la n Century plant. Sisal, hemp, from which
rope is made. Agane rigida L. Agane sisalana.
Trese pit pouri To behave badly, to do terrible,
objectionable things. Chire pit To be at each other’s
throat.
pita Later
piten an n Whore (rare).
piti attrib Small, little, slight, meager, thin, lean.
V ti. Pou pi piti For at least. Piti piti Little by
little, gently, quietly, gradual(ly); very small. Pi
piti Younger, less, lesser, fewer. Before a noun,
usually “ti”. You ti A bit of, some. Ban’m you ti
glas Give me a little ice. Vin pi piti To lessen, to
decrease, to become smaller.
pitimi an, ptimi, timi n Millet*. Pitimi chandèl
Type of pitimi. Pitimi san gadò A person without
a protector, such as a woman without a husband.
(syn) of chen san mèt.
pitit la n Child, son, daughter; offshoot, runner.
Pitit gason Son. Pitit fi Daughter. Ti pitit Baby.
Pitit pitit Grandchild, grandson, granddaughter.
Pote pitit To bear or carry a child. Pitit deyò
Illegitimate child (one born out of wedlock). Pitit
pitit gason Grandson. Pitit pitit fi Granddaughter.
Fè pitit 1. To give birth, to breed, to reproduce.
2. To propagate, spread, yield (earn) interest.
pito 1
vt To prefer. M’pito rete I prefer to stay.
M’ta pito dòmi I would rather sleep.
pito 2
It is preferable that; it is better to. Pito ou
vini It is better that you come. It is preferable that
you come.
pituit la n Continuous sneezing, catarrh.
pitye a n Pity*.
piwèt V pirwèt
piwete V pirwete
piyajè a n Looter, pillager*, one who grabs
anything he can get his hands on.
piyay la n Pillage*, looting; free for all. Te gen
piyay lavil la There was looting in the city. Piyay!
Here it is! Come and get it! (Said when someone
comes and brings a lot of goodies and he throws
them up in the air, and they are for the grabbing).
Cf. E. pillage. Yo di ou se piyay m’ap bay? Did
they tell you it was all free? or that I was giving it
away? Ou achte bèl soulye sa a pou ven dola? Se
piyay You bought those beautiful shoes for twenty
dollars? It is a bargain. Tèt chòv bay kwafè piyay
A bald head is a boon to the barber.
piye vt To loot, to rob, to plunder; to pilfer,
sack, steal. Pillage*. vi To aim and throw in
order to see who goes first (games of marbles,
jacks, etc.). Vin piye Let us see who goes first.
pla a n Platter*, dish; (food).
plafon an n Ceiling.
plafonnen vt To put on a ceiling.
plaj la, laplaj n Beach.
plak la n 1. Phonograph record. 2. Automobile
license plates. 3. Peculiar funny story. Tande
you plak Here is a funny story.
plaka a n Closet; wardrobe (for clothes).
plakbòl V blakbòl
plake 1
vt & vi To smack, to plaster, i.e. to
throw something (in someone’s face); to dash
violently; to stand on one’s hands (gymnastics).
Plake sou 1. To stick to, to become attached to.
2. To affix (to).
plake 2
attrib Tight (clothes).
plan 1
an n Seedling. Cutting, slip, young plant
for propagation.
plan 2
an n Plan(s)*, stratagem, scheme, trick,
design, program, pattern, outline, blue-print,
chart. Ou sou plan You are scheming; you are
lying. Fè plan a) To make plans. b) To scheme.
Timoun nan ap fè plan The child is making up
things, scheming.
plan 3
an, pla a n 1. Palm (of the hand). 2. Sole
(of the foot).
planch la n Plank*, board. Planch balansin Swing
(boards). Planch kabann Bed slats. Planch klwazon
The boards (planks) of a partition. Ranje planch yo
To put the boards in good order.
planche a n Floor (wood).
planchèt la n 1. Small board. 2. Ironing board.
plancheye vt To install a floor with wooden
planks.
plani, aplani vt To even, to smooth, to equalize,
to plane*.
plann nan, plàn n Pawn*. Mete lan plann (or)
mete lekòl To pawn.
plannen 1
, plane vi To float in the air, i.e. to
glide, to plunge (soar) in the air. Si li pat
plannen dèyè balon an, li tap gòl If he had not
jumped after the ball, they would have scored a goal.
plannen 2
vt To pawn. Zafè’l pat bon; li plannen
tout rad li Things were so bad that he pawned all
his clothes.
plant la n Plant*.
plantasyon an n Plantation*, planting*.
plante vt 1. To plant*, to seed. 2. To leave s.o.
standing.
plas la n Place*, room, space, seat; job, position.
Town square. V plasdam. Nan plas (or) alaplas
Instead of. Nan pwen plas There is no room. An
plas In one place. Plas leta Government job. Gen
moun ki pito travay nan prive, pase yo nan plas leta
There are people who prefer to work privately rather
than to be on the government payroll.
151 P
plasaj la, plasay n Common law marriage, concubinage.
System whereby a man shacks up
with a woman or different women (whether he
be married or not) and they live as man and
wife, without the benefit of clergy.
plasdam nan, plas la n Town square.
plase 1
vt To place*. M’plase lajan’m alenterè
labank I deposit my money in the bank in an interestbearing
account. Plase you mo To put a word in.
plase 2
(ak) vi To find a place for a woman in a
house, and live with her, and bear her expenses
(without benefit of clergy). Li plase ak yon fanm
He is shacking up with a woman (as his concubine).
V plasaj.
plasman an, anplasman n Location, lot.
plastè a n (Mustard) plaster*. V anplat.
plastik la n Plastic*.
plat 1
la n Plate*, plateful of food, tray. Li nan
plat li He is in his own ballfield, things are looking
good for him.
plat 2
la n Plaster*, plaster* cast.
plat 3
attrib Flat; shallow. Kouche plat Horizontal.
platfòm nan n Platform*. Platfòm soulye Inner
sole of a shoe.
plati vt To flatten, to even off.
platin nan n 1. Hotplate (e.g. for preparing
cassava). 2. Platinum*.
plato a n 1. Plateau* (Also platon). 2. Tray,
plate*. 3. Pan for making bread. You plato pen
A pan full of bread.
platon an n Plateau*.
plè vt To please*. Ou pa kab plè toutmoun You
can’t please everybody.
plèd la n Competition. Fè plèd To compete.
pleday la n Competition. Fè, leve pleday To
compete.
plede vt 1. To plead*, to argue (you kòz a case).
2. “Plede” plus infinitive equals “to keep on
(and on) doing something, to repeat it, to continuously
do it. Plede pèdi To keep on losing.
pledman an n 1. Pleading*, plea*. 2. Quarrel,
argument. 3. Competition. Fè pledman To com-
pete.
plen vt To fill. Full, satiate(d); full of, covered.
Plen kòk sou pye kòk la The coconut tree is full of
fruit.
plenn 1
attrib With calf, pregnant (said of animals,
whereas “gròs” and “ansent” are used for women).
Plenn lin Full moon.
plenn 2
nan, laplenn n Plain*, lowland.
plenn 3
vi To moan; to complain*. vt To pity,
to have compassion for. M’plenn sò ou I pity
your fate.
plent la n 1. Moaning. Pouse plent To moan.
2. Complaint*. M’ap pote plent ba ou I am complaining
to you. Pote plent (kont) To bring a
charge (against), to lodge a complaint.
plenyadò a n Habitual complainer.
plenyen vi To complain*, to lament. M’pa
renmen rete kote moun kap plenyen tout tan I do not
like to stay with people that are always grumbling.
plerezi a, plirizi n Pleurisy*.
plètil, pleti Yes! (in answer to a call). Here I
am. V eti. Lan lakou madan plètil An imaginary
place where people are well informed. Se gran tifi
lan lakou madan plètil This girl knows more about
life than you think.
plezante vi To joke, to jest, to kid.
plezantri a n Joke, pleasantry*. Fè plezantri To
joke, to jest.
plezi a n Pleasure*.
pli 1
V pi
pli 2
a n 1. Fold, crease. Tigason sa a fin pran
move pli This boy has acquired bad habits. Kat pli
mare lan fron’l He is frowning (or) he knits his
brow in anger. Yo ba’l yon pli makak They thrashed
him for good. 2. Wrinkle.
pliche vt To brandish, to pull out, to unsheath,
to hold, to take hold of. Pliche’m lajan’m Fork
over the money! (syn) Kale’m lajan’m.
plim nan n 1. Feather, fleece, hair (on the body),
pubic hair. Plim chen Dog’s hair. Plim pa gouye
Not a hair moves. All is quiet. Plim je Eyelashes.
M’pa fè yon plim I did not score; I came out
empty-handed. 2. The (writing) pen. Bwa plim
Penholder. Ti plim Steel pen (point). Plim a
rezèvwa Fountain pen.
plimatwa a n Writer.
plimay la n Plumage*.
plimeank Educated.
plimen vt 1. To pluck (feathers); to skin, to
peel, to shell. Plimen poul a. To pluck the
feathers of a chicken. b. To take advantage of a
situation. 2. To go to bed with, to copulate, to
have intercourse with, to screw.
plimo a n 1. Feather duster. 2. Powder-puff.
plirizi V plerezi
plis 1
, piplis adv More, beyond, further, plus*.
(Usually it precedes nouns and follows verbs).
Ou ba’l plis You gave him more. Nou vle plis lajan
We want more money. Plis pase More than. Senk
plis de Five plus two. Sa a yo peze plis These
weigh more. An plis In excess, besides.
P 152
plis 2
, pi plis adv The most. Nan twa elèv sa yo,
se Andre ki etidye plis Of these three pupils, it is
Andrew who studies the most.
plis 3
... plis The more... the more.
plise vt To plait, pleat, quill. To fold; to wrinkle.
Figi’l plise His face is wrinkled.
pliske V puiske
pliye vt To bend, to fold, to crease. Folded,
creased. Pliye lèt la byen pou mete’l nan anvlòp
Fold the letter well to put it in the envelope. Pa ekri
lèt ak papye sa a; li pliye Do not write a letter on
this paper, it is wrinkled. V ploye.
plizyè indef adj Several, many, various, some.
plòg la n Plug*.
ploge vt 1. To plug* in. vi 1. To hold tightly
while dancing.
plon an n Lead (metal). Bullet. Plon gaye
Buck-shot. Liyaplon Plumb* line*.
plonbe vt To fill (a tooth). Word also used in
the game of marbles.
plonje vi 1. To fall into, to dive, to dip, to
plunge.* vt 2. To dip, to immerse.
plop plop adv Quickly, fast, in a jiffy.
plòt 1
la n A roll (or) a ball (of thread). M’achte
yon plòt fil pou’m monte kap I bought a ball of
string to fly my kite.
plòt 2
la n Small pile of, a small quantity of. Plòt
labou A small pile of mud.
plotonnay la n Mixing of people, things; fusing.
plotonnen vt To roll up, to reel in, to wind
(thread, string). To wrap (around).
ploum A la ploum In the (special) Fachsprache
of the cockpit, matching one’s cock “alaploum”
(Sp.) means that the winner gets all, the bet as
well as the rooster to the (last) feather(s). Winner
takes all.
ploye vt To bend (over), to fold. V pliye.
po 1
a n Skin, pealing, peel, leather, rind; husk.
Po bal Cartridge shell. Po bèt Hide. Po bouch
Lips. Po nwa (nut) shell. Po ze Egg shell. Po
melon Watermelon rind. Po lanbi Conch shell. Po
kabrit Goat’s skin. Po je Eyelid. Gro po Heavy,
expensive suit. Po kat, po Low cards. Po liv
Cover (of a book). Po tèt Scalp. Yo se chemiz ak po
They are inseparable friends.
po 2
a, pòt la n Pitcher, pot*, vase. Po flè Flower
pot*. Pòt tè Earthen pot.
pò a n Harbor, port*.
poban an n Small bottle, jar, flask, vial. Slang:
Head, person. You ti poban luil pa kont pou fè
manje a That little oil container is not enough to
cook that meal.
poblèm V problèm
pòch la n 1. Pocket*. 2. Scrotum. 3. Pack.
Holster. You pòch sigarèt A pack of cigarettes.
Pòch revòlvè Holster (for guns).
pochen V prochen
podyab, pòv dyab What a pity! Poor devil!
poèm nan, pwèm n Poem*.
pofesè V profesè
pofite V profite
poje a, po je n Eyelid. Li mouri pou poje’l He
died for nothing.
pòk Paralyzed, crippled (hand). Li gen men pòk
His hands are paralyzed. (The word is also used
in the game of marbles).
pokè a n Poker* (card game).
poko, panko, pako, ponko Not yet; not ... yet.
Pat ko (past tense). Ou poko tande sa? Have you
not heard it already? Lè nou te rive, midi pat ko
sonnen When we arrived, it was not yet noon.
poli 1
vt To polish*, to smooth.
poli 2
attrib Polite*.
polis la n Policeman*.
politès la, lapolitès n Politeness*.
politik 1
la n Politics*.
politik 2
attrib Political*.
politisyen an n Politician*.
polyo a n Polio*.
pòm 1
nan, ponm n Apple. Chou a fè ponm The
cabbage has grown into a round head.
pòm 2
kajou a n Cashew Apple. Anacardium
occidentale L.
pòm 3
lyann nan n A yellow fruit the size of an
almond or plum, full of seeds, which are sucked
and taste like grenadines, to which they are relat-
ed.
pòm 4
malkadi a n Tiny fruit the size of a cherry,
(edible) but not a delicacy.
pomad la, ponmad la n Ointment, pomade*.
pòmdadan an n Adam’s* apple*.
pòmdetè a, ponmtè n Potato. Solanum tuberosum,
L. Pòmdetè fri French fries.
pon an n 1. Bridge. 2. Deck (of a ship). 3. Fly
(of trousers).
ponch la n 1. Punch* (beverage). 2. Punch*
(blow).
pongongon an n 1. Bothersome person, pest.
2. An insolvable problem.
ponko V poko
153 P
ponm V pòm
ponmad V pomad
ponmen vi To blow up, to inflate. To grow to a
head. Chou a ponmen The cabbage has grown into
a round head. Ou ponmen kon flè You are filling
up like a flower.
ponmkèt la n Cupcake. (Round, flat cake made
of flour, eggs, milk, sugar, baking powder, cannelle,
cinnamon, and baked in a buttered pan).
Cf. E. plum cake*.
ponn vi & vt To lay eggs; to be setting. M’fè ou
ponn I socked it to you, I got you.
ponp 1
la n Pump*.
ponp 2
gazolin nan n Gas* station.
ponpadò attrib Stamping (to beat the ground
forcibly). You chwal ponpadò A horse that likes to
jump up and down as if buckjumping. V ponpe.
ponpe vt 1. To draw (water from a pump*).
2. To inflate a tire, to pump* air into it. vi
1. To jump up and down (for joy, out of anger,
etc.). 2. To buckjump (horses). 3. To gash
(blood, water, etc).
ponponm Promenade*, walk. Fè you ti ponponm
To take a walk. V promnad.
ponpye a n Fireman. Kamyon ponpye Firetruck.
ponya a, pwaya a n 1. Dagger. Nèg sa a se you
ponya This man is a bluffer, you cannot confide in
him. 2. A usurious loan. M’pral pran you ponya
I am going to get a loan at an usurious rate. Afè’m
pa bon, m’bezwen you ponya Business is not good, I
need a loan shark. Cf. E. poniard.
ponyade vt To stab.
ponyen 1
an n Handful.
ponyen 2
vt To grab (by handfuls).
ponyèt la n Wrist. Touse ponyèt To roll up one’s
sleeves (and get ready for work). Bat laponyèt To
masturbate.
pope a, poupe a n Doll. Cf. Puppet*. You pope
zaza A very elegant doll (girl), that is overdressed.
popelakomedi a n Puppet.
popilas la n Crowd, throng. Populace*.
popilasyon an n Population*.
popilè attrib Well-known, popular*.
pòpòt la n Cry-baby.
pòpòz V kèpòpòz
popyè (je), pòpyè a n Eyelid.
poro a, pwaro n Leek. Allium porrum L.
Port-au-Prince V Pòtoprens
pòs la n Police station. N’apral nan pòs We are
going to the police station. Fè pòs To stand guard.
posede vt To own, possess*.
posesyon V prosesyon
posèvèbal V prosèvèbal
posib attrib Possible*. Sa pa posib ditou It is out
of the question.
pòslèn nan n Porcelain*, china.
poste vt To mail, to post* (letter), to post*
(sentry).
posti a n Posture*. Sa mete’l an movèz posti That
put him in a bad spot.
postim nan n Pus.
posyon an n Potion*.
pòsyon an n Portion*, part.
pot Shortened form for pote. It can never end a
sentence. Pot liv la pou mwen Bring me that book.
Carry the book for me.
pòt 1
la n Door. Port*. Pòt an pòt From door to
door. Pòtakoulis Sliding door.
pòt 2
attrib Untamed, not broken, shy, fearful.
Bourik pòt A shy donkey. < Sp potro.
pòtal la, pòtay la n Entrance, portal*, gate.
potanta a n Potentate*.
potao a n Jug (for water).
potchanm nan n Chamber-pot*.
pòtchay la n Luggage rack, trunk (of cars).
pòte a n Litter.
pote, pòte, pot vt To carry, to have, to bring.
Pote bagay sa a ban mwen Bring that thing to me.
Pote’l tounen ba yo Bring it back to them. Pote vini
Bring. Pote mak To bear a scar. Fanm jouda
renmen pote ale, pote vini Garrulous, treacherous
women love to report tales and stories from one woman
to another. Pote ale To carry away, to remove.
Manje pou pote ale Food to carry out.
potèj V protèj
poteke V ipoteke
pòtfèy la n Wallet, billfold, pocketbook.
pòtgòj la n Bra. V soutyen.
potko Did not ... yet, had not... yet. Cf. poko.
potle attrib Strong, portly*.
poto a n Pole, pillar, stake, post. Bay poto To
stand someone up. Yè swa Mèseli ban’m you poto
Last night Mercelie stood me up. She did not keep
her appointment. Poto kwen A corner pole. Poto
mitan The center pole in the middle of the hounfò;
the place where all ceremonies take place. Also
means the main support of a group.
potokòl V protokòl
P 154
Pòtoprens Port-au-Prince, capital of Haiti.
potorik attrib Strong, hefty. You potorik gason A
big, strong, hefty man.
pòtplim nan n Penholder.
pòtray la n Chest. You pòtray gason A big, strong
man.
pòtre a n Snapshot, picture, photo. Portrait*.
MORISSEAU-LEROY/D-12: Pa pran pòtre bèt
mwen Do not photograph my animal 2. Like, in
the manner of. L’ap ri pòtre yon idyo He is
laughing like an idiot.
pou 1
a n Louse. Pou bwa Woodlouse.
pou 2
a n Pulse*. Doktè a pran pou’l The
physician took his pulse.
pou 3
prep For, for the benefit of, s’ (possession),
as for, for the sake of. Lanmès la se siz è pou set è
The mass is from six to seven o’clock. Sa a pou
mwen This one belongs to me. Se pou li m’fè sa I
did it for his sake. Pou di... Is it possible that,
would you say that... Pou sa Because of it, on
account of it.
pou 4
conj So that, in order that.
pou 5
dan anri, pou dan ri For a trifle, for nothing.
pou 6
granmesi In vain; for nothing.
poubwa a n Tip (gratuity).
pouchen V pousen
poud la, lapoud n Powder*; gunpowder. Poud
kafe Ground coffee. Poud elevasyon Yeast; baking
powder. Poud mache prese Magical powder.
poudayè, pou dayè Besides. Cf. dayè.
poudbwa a, poul bwa a n Termite.
pouding nan n Pudding*.
poudre vi To powder*. Pye poudre Wanderer,
one who likes to walk, who never sits down; he is
always on the move (go).
poudriye a n Powder* box.
pouf attrib Flabby, fluffy, soft.
pouki interrog adv Why.
poukisa interrog adv Why. Cf. pouki.
poukò, pou kò In “poukò’m, poukò’l”, etc. alone,
by one’s self.
poukont, pou kont In “poukont mwen, poukont
li”, etc. alone, by one’s self.
poul 1
la n Hen, fowl, chicken. Manman poul
Hen. Ti poul Chick. Poul pa chante devan kòk
When the rooster is around, the hens cannot cackle.
People must bow to authority. Lè poul va fè dan
Never (when hens grow teeth). M’wete poul mwen
I got myself out of a bad situtation. Mouri poul To
take it easy, to bide one’s time. M’ap mouri poul
mwen annatandan m’fè diferaman I am biding my
time before I do anything else. An nou chape poul
nou Let us get out of here quickly, and save our
skin. Poul pent A black and bespeckled hen. Poul
kaye (Ennery) A hen of two different colors. Kite’l
ale. L’ap (re)tounen. Se poul kay Let her go. She
will come back. She belongs here.
poul 2
la n Answers to questions obtained by
cheating during an exam. Pran poul To obtain
the answers. Bay poul To give them.
poulajoli a n Heron. Nan rebò rivyè Lenbe a te
gen poulajoli ki tap flannen At the edge of the river
at Limbe there were herons sauntering about.
poulaye a n 1. Chicken-house, hen-roost. 2. The
top-most section of a theatre where the cheapest
seats are. Cf. It. piccionaja.
pouldlo a, poul dlo a n Coot.
poulen an n Colt, stallion.
poulèt la n Pullet*, hen, chicken, young chick;
girl.
pouli a n Pulley*.
poulich la n Filly (young mare).
poulmouye, poul mouye n Coward.
poulpoul la n Chicken flea.
poum nan n Fart. (Polite form) V pete.
poumon an n Lungs. (Pulmonary*).
poupe V pope
poupou 1
a n Shit, excrement, bowel movement,
poopoo*. Fè poupou To defecate. V kaka.
poupou 2
vt To shit, to defecate.
poupye V koupye
pouri vi To rot, to decay; to spoil. vt To
corrupt. Rotten; spoiled, corrupted, perverted;
infested. Cf. E. Putrid*. Chèz la pouri ak pinèz
The chair is infested with bed bugs. Tigason sa a
fin pouri This is a spoiled child; he knows so many
dirty things.
pouriti a n Decay. An pouriti Putrid*. Yo pa
mete sèl ak pwav nan vyann nan, li an pouriti They
did not put salt and pepper on the meat; it has gone
bad.
pouryanis la, pouyanis n Free from care, unmindful,
unconcerned person.
pouryen an n Unmindful, free from care, unconcerned
person.
pous la n Thumb; inch; a bit. Also Gro pous
Thumb. M’se gro pous I am separate and distinct;
I will not get involved.
pousad la n Push*, shove.
pousade vt To push*, to shove.
pousan Percent*.
155 P
pouse vt 1. To push* (away). 2. To urge, to
induce, to incite. Pouse dife To sow dissension.
vi To grow, to come out (plant). Mayi a pa
pouse The corn (plant) did not grow.
pousen an, pouchen an n Chick.
pouso a n Pig. Cf. E. porker*.
pousuiv, pouswiv, pousiv vt To pursue*, to go
after, follow, to make (go) after, to persecute.
pousyè a n Dust.
poutan conj Nevertheless, however.
poutèt 1
prep Because of, due to, on account of,
owing to; for the sake of.
poutèt 2
conj Because, since.
pouvi Provided, so long as. V depi.
pouvwa a n Power*.
pòv, pò attrib Poor*, beggar. Pò pitit Poor child.
Podyab, pòv dyab Poor devil, what a shame! What
a pity! Moun pòv Poor folks. “Pòv” may be used
an an adj. or as a noun. Pòv tifi a, papa’l mouri
Poor child, her father died.
powèt la n Poet*.
pòy 1
la n Cigarette butt (or) stub.
pòy 2
la n 1. Fighting cock, game cock. 2. Match,
equal. Li pi piti pase ou, li pa pòy ou He is
smaller than you, he is no match for you.
pòy 3
la n The milk which remains in the cow’s
teat after milking.
pòy 4
la n Core (of a boil). The central mass of
narcotic tissue.
pòz 1
la n Stop, halt, rest, pause*. Pran you pòz
To take a rest.
pòz 2
la n Attitude, pose*, posture. Li pran pòz
gran nèg He is putting on airs like a big shot.
poze 1
, repoze vi To rest, to repose*.
poze 2
vi 1. To lie (bird). 2. To settle (liquid).
3. To put on airs. 4. To touch down (an airplane).
vt 1. To place, to lay, to put. Poze san
ou Calm down. 2. To ask. Poze kestyon To ask
questions.
pozisyon an n Place; position*. San pozisyon
Anxious, restless. Fè pozisyon To settle down, to
take a spouse. Cf. plase.
pozitif adv Just (now) positively* yes (pop).
pral V prale
prale, pral To be going to. M’pral legliz I am
going to church.
pran vt 1. To take, to get, to seize, to choose, to
catch. vi 1. To copulate, to have intercourse.
2. Used together with another verb to express
the durative of the verb which follows: to begin
to, to start. Li pran ri He burst out laughing.
3. To be viable (a graft), to grow (a plant).
Examples and expressions: Pran ak de bra To
welcome with open arms. Pran kote (or) pran bò
kote To take after. Pran plezi To enjoy. Pran
ransèyman To inquire. Pran bòt To dismiss summarily.
Pran responsabilite To assume responsibility.
Pran revanch To get revenge. Pran vwa To
imitate (s.o.’s voice). N’ap pran Mòn Tapyon talè
We will arrive at the Tapyon mountain in a moment.
M’pa pran nan ti plan konsa I will not be taken in
(by that scheme, trick). Plan sa a pap pran That
scheme will not work. Ki bò ou ap pran? Where
are you going? Pran you moun fè fas To fool
somebody. To make fun of s.o. Pran you je baton
To receive a thrashing. Pran you moun pou you lòt
To mistake s.o. for s.o. else. Nenpòt sa li fè ou, se
rete pran Whatever he does to you, you have to take
it. Pran men ou avè’m Get in line, conform yourself,
do not fool around with me. Yo pran danse They
started to dance. Ble pa pran isit Wheat will not
grow here. Yo pran’l nan pyèj They caught him in
a trap.
pratik la n (Regular) customers, clientele, patient,
client; dealer. (adj) Practical*, handy. Fè pratik
(ak) To deal regularly with s.o.; to establish a
buyer-seller relationship on a regular basis.
pray (syn) (North) pral = To be going to.
pre 1
, prè, pwe prep Close to, near; against.
(adv) Close, near. Tou pre (quite) Close, quite
near. De pre Closely. Lè m’gade’l de prè When I
looked at him at close range. Ou pa sanble’l de prè
ni de lwen You don’t resemble him at all.
pre 2
, prè, pwe attrib Ready. Mwen pre pou nenpòt
ki bagay I am ready for anything. Avyon an pre
pou pati The plane is ready for departure.
prè a n Loan (rare). V ponya.
prèch la n Sermon.
preche vt To preach*.
predi vt To predict*, to foretell.
predikatè a n Preacher*.
prefè a n Prefect*.
preferans la n Preference*. De preferans Rather.
prefere vt To prefer*. The ordinary word is
“pito”.
prejije a n Prejudice*. Fè prejije (kont) To
discriminate (against).
prekosyon an n Precaution*, caution*. Pran
prekosyon To look out.
prela V pwela
premye 1
, prenmye, premyè First, eldest. Cf. E.
Premier* (minister). Se premyè fwa It is the
first time.
premye 2
a n Inner sole (shoe).
premyèman adv First, in the first place.
P 156
prenè a n Taker, buyer. M’jwenn you prenè pou
kay la I found a buyer for the house.
prenon an n First name, baptismal name.
prens la n Prince*.
prensès la n Princess*.
prensip la n Principle*. Habit, custom.
preparasyon an n Preparation*.
preparatwa attrib Preparatory*. Li lan klas preparatwa
He is in a preparatory class.
prepare vt To prepare*; make ready. Prepare ou
Make yourself ready, get ready. V pare.
prepoze a n Tax collector, revenue agent.
près la n Press*, clamp. Menizye a mete travay la
nan près The carpenter put the work in the press.
près pou V prèt pou
presbitè a n Rectory, parsonage, presbytery*.
prese vt To press* (clothes). vi 1. To hurry, to
be in a hurry, to rush. Mache prese To walk
hurriedly. Prese pati To hurry to leave, to go in a
hurry. Prese (pou) To be anxious (to), to be eager
(to). Fè prese To rush.
presipis la n Precipice*.
presizeman adv Precisely*.
presizyon an n Precision*, accuracy.
prèske adv Almost.
preskri vt To prescribe*.
preskripsyon an n Prescription*.
prestij la n Prestige*.
presyon an n 1. Pressure*, press*, stress. Fè
presyon sou To exert (put) pressure on someone.
2. Gripper (button), snap. Also bouton presyon.
prèt pou, pwèt pou, près pou About to, close to.
Li pat prèt ni pretann pou marye She was in no way
ready to marry.
pretann vi To claim, to pretend*, to contend.
Li pretann di He says (that is his version).
pretansye attrib Vain, proud, conceited, haughty,
pretentious*.
pretansyon an n Pretension*.
prete vt To lend; to borrow (without specifying
to whom or from whom). Prete (nan men) To
borrow (from). Nou prete senk dola lan men yo We
borrowed five dollars from them. Nou prete yo senk
dola We lent them five dollars. Mande prete To
ask for a loan. Ofri prete To offer to lend.
pretèks la n Pretext*, pretense.
prèv la n Proof*, evidence.
prevnans la n Kindness, consideration, attention.
Fè you moun yon prevnans To do s.o. a special
kindness (unexpectedly).
prevni vt To notify (in advance), forewarn.
prevwa vt To forecast, foresee.
prevyen De ki prevyen What caused it? (or) What
is the origin of it?
prezan attrib Present*.
prezans la n Presence*.
prezantab attrib Presentable*.
prezantasyon an n Presentation*.
prezante vt To present*, introduce. vi 1. To
show up. 2. Byen prezante To make a good appearance.
Mal prezante To make a bad appearance.
prezidan an n President*. Chairperson, chairman.
pri 1
a n 1. Price*, cost, value, charge, rate.
2. Prize*. 3. Fare (taxi, bus, etc.). Fè pri To
bring a good price (a merchandise). Fè pri, fè jis
pri to give a better price, (for merchandise).
pri 2
Caught, trapped, taken. Ou pri You are done
for.
pridan attrib Prudent*, cautious.
pridans la n Prudence*. Ak pridans Cautiously.
prigad, pringad Warning. Bay prigad To give a
warning. Mete yon moun sou pringad li To warn
s.o.
prije, pije vt To squeeze, to mash. Si papa ou
pran ou, li va pije ou tankou zoranj If your father
catches you, he will mash you like an orange.
prim nan n Premium* (cut) taken by the owner
of a gambling establishment or place.
primè attrib Primary* (school).
prin nan n Plum, prune*.
pringad V prigad
prive attrib Private*.
privilèj la n Privilege*.
privye a, prevye a n 1. Fish net. 2. Sparrow
hawk. V malfini.
priye To pray; to beg fervently, request ardently.
M’priye ou an gras I sincerely beg you, please.
priyè a, lapriyè n Prayer*; prayer meeting. Bay
priyè To argue for or in behalf of, to sweet-talk, to
try to convince with nice words. L’ap fè (di) you ti
priyè He is saying a prayer. He is praying. Li bay
fi a priyè pou’l sa bon He sweet-talked the girl in
order to seduce her. Pran priyè To give in to s.o.’s
request or insistence.
priz la n 1. Electric socket. 2. Priz tabak Pinch
of snuff. 3. Hold. Gen priz sou To have a hold
on.
157 P
prizon an n Jail, prison*. Mete lan prizon To
imprison*, to jail, to incarcerate, to put away. Pran
prizon To go to prison.
prizonye a, prizonnye a n Prisoner*, convict.
probab attrib Probable*.
problèm nan, poblèm nan n Problem*, difficulty,
puzzle.
proche, aproche vi & vt To come near; to bring
close. Approach*. Proche chèz la bò tab la Bring
the chair near the table. M’vle moutre ou you bagay,
proche I want to show you something, come near
me.
prochen 1
an, pwochen, pochen Neighbor (bibli-
cal).
prochen 2
attrib Next, coming (up). Mwa prochen
The coming month. V prochèn.
prochèn attrib Next, coming. Used with words
which are feminine in French in set phrases
Semèn prochèn Next week. Prochèn fwa Next time.
produi 1
a n Product*, produce*.
produi 2
, prodi vt To produce*.
profesè a, pofesè a n Professor*, teacher, in-
structor.
profesyon an, pofesyon an n Profession*.
profèt la n Prophet*.
profi a n Profit*, benefit, advantage, gain.
profite, pofite vi To grow fast. To make good
use of, to profit* by, to render profit (s); to
grow big. M’profite pou ... I availed myself of the
opportunity to ...
profitè a n One who unduly profits from a
situation. Profiteer*.
profonde attrib Well versed in magic. Cf. Pro-
found*.
profondè a n Depth.
program nan n Program*, schedule.
progrè a, progre n Progress*.
projè a n Plan, project*, design.
proklame, poklame vt To proclaim*.
proletè a n Low class person; one who belongs
to the masses as opposed to aristocracy. Prole-
tariat*.
promennen, pronmennen, promne vi To take a
walk, to stroll along. Grenn pronmennen One who
is always on the move. vt Al promennen chen an
Go walk the dog.
promès la, pronmès la n Promise*. Promès se
dèt Promise is duty.
promèt, pronmèt vt 1. To promise*. vi To have
potential(s). Tifi a promèt It looks like that girl
will be beautiful.
promnad la, ponmnad la, promnad n Walk,
stroll, excursion. Promenade*. V ponponm.
promosyon an n Promotion*. Bay you promosyon
To promote* (an employee).
pronmennen V promennen
pronmès V promès
pronmèt V promèt
prononse vt To pronounce*.
prononsyasyon an n Pronunciation*.
pròp 1
attrib Proper*; clean, pure, tidy, neat.
Good at, good for. Flannen sèlman ou pròp You
are only good at loafing. When preceding the
noun, “pròp” means “own”. Pròp papa’l His
own father.
pròp 2
, pwòp Completely, through and through;
really. Yo bat li pròp They gave him a good
thrashing. They beat him savagely. Ou konnen byen
pròp And yet you know. You know very well.
propagann nan, popagann nan n False information,
propaganda* (usu) pej; publicity.
propoze vt To propose*.
propozizyon an n Proposal*.
propriyete a n Lot, piece of land with or without
improvements; property*.
propriyetè a, propyetè a n Owner, proprietor*,
landlord, landowner.
pròpte 1
a n Cleaning, cleanliness. Cf. E.
Propriety*.
pròpte 2
vt To clean. Pròpte mwen nèt, tanpri
Clean me up completely, please.
prosè a, prose a n Case (legal process*), litigation,
lawsuit.
prosesyon an, posesyon an, laposesyon n Pro-
cession*.
prosèvèbal la, posèvèbal la n Report. Tire
prosèvèbal Official written report by an officer or
magistrate.
prospere vi To prosper*.
protèj la, potèj n 1. Protection*. 2. Condom.
proteje vt To protect*, to shield (against).
proteksyon an n Protection*.
protektè a n Protector*.
protestan an, potestan an n Protestant*.
proteste vi To object, to protest*.
protokòl la, potokòl la n 1. Protocol*. San
protokòl Lax in his attire and manner. Kenbe
P 158
protokòl To keep a certain dignity. 2. Dignitary,
important person (pop).
prouve vt To prove*.
provèb la n Proverb*, saying.
provens la n Province*; any place other than the
capital. Nou rele provens tout kote ki pa capital
yon peyi We call provinces any region of a country
which is outside its capital Moun provens People
outside the capital, people not from Port-au-Prince.
provizyon an n 1. Provision*(s) (food); 2. Backing.
Pòl ban’m you chèk san provizyon Paul gave
me a rubber check (no funds to cover it).
provoke vt To provoke*.
pst interj Hi there! (“pst” is used when calling
s.o.)
pti Small (used pretonically). Yon vye pti moun
A very small child. Petty*.
pui a, pi a n Well. Fouye you pui To dig a well.
puisan, pisan attrib Powerful.
puisans la, pwisans, pisans n 1. Power. 2. Vitality
(sexual power).
puiske, piske, pwiske, pliske conj Since, because,
whereas.
pwa 1
a n Weight. Pran pwa To put on weight.
Pèdi pwa To lose weight. Pwa senkant a) Fifty
pound weight used on scales. b) Feeling of uneasiness
caused by a problem. Problèm sa a mete yon pwa
senkant sou lestomak mwen This problem looms
heavy on my heart.
pwa 2
a, pra a n Bean, pea*. Pwa rouj (Dry) red
beans. Pwa tann Fresh string beans. Pwa kase
Lentils. Lens culinaris, Lens esculenta. Cf. Our
split pea soup. Pwa maldyòk Horse bean, swordbean.
Canavalia ensiformis DC. M’bwè pwa I
give up. I cannot guess. Other types of peas:
Pwa blan, pwa nwa, pwa enkoni, pwa endyen,
pwa boukousou, pwa kouri. Pwa chich Chick
peas = Ciceri. Pwa frans Peas. Pisum sativum L.
Pwa kongo Cajanus indicus. Pwa souch (chouch)
Phaseolus lunatus. Butter bean(s).
pwal la, pwèl, prèl n Hair (on the body). Pubic
hair. Pwèl raz Short pubic hair. Pwal je Eyelashes.
Monte you cheval a pwal To ride bareback.
pwar la n Pear*.
pwaro V poro
pwason an, pweson an n Fish. Pwason fri Small-fry.
Pwason volan, pwason zèl Flying fish. Pwason
ame Porcupine fish.
pwatray la n Breast (of a horse).
pwatrin nan n Chest, bosom. By ext. Breast.
Maladi pwatrin Tuberculosis.
pwatrinè attrib Tubercular, consumptive. One
who has tuberculosis.
pwav la n Pepper*. Pwav Ginen Guinea-pepper.
pwaya V ponya
pwazon an, pwezon n Poison*.
pwazonnen V anpwazonnen
pwèl 1
V pwal
pwèl 2
V pwelon
pwela a, prela n Cloth cover for a truck, tarpaulin.
pwelon an, pwèl la n (Frying) pan.
pwelyèm Tiny bit. Pou yon pwelyèm By a hair’s
breadth.
pwèm V poèm
pwen 1
an n Fist. Kout pwen A blow with the fist,
punch.
pwen 2
an n Full stop (grammar); point (at
cards); stitch; dot on the vowel i; grade(s), marks
in school; degree, extent. Examples and expressions:
Ki pwen ou? How are you? Pwen fèb
Failing, weak point. Se pwen sansib li He is very
touchy on that subject. Mete yon pwen final To put
an end to.
pwen 3
an n Vodou term. A charm for revitalization,
fortification. Protective charm, supernatural
power given by a Vodou priest. Pran pwen To
acquire special, supernatural powers.
pwenn No; there is no -. Pwenn fè pa No special
favor, nothing doing.
pwenson an n Shoemaker’s awl.
pwent 1
la n Tip, point*. Sou pwent pye On tip
toe. Mache sou pwent pye To tip toe. Chita sou yon
pwent kabann To sit on the edge of a bed.
pwent 2
la n Tire pwent, voye pwent To make
allusions (pej), to insinuate, to hint, to speak indirectly,
in parables, to cast insults indirectly.
pwente vi 1. To point* (at, sou). Dwèt mwen te
pwente sou li My finger pointed at him. 2. To
appear, to show up. Yon bato pwente lan larad la
A ship appeared on the horizon.
pwenti 1
a n Measurement (shoes). Ki pwenti
ou? What size (shoes) do you wear? For suits see
nimero.
pwenti 2
attrib Puckered, pointed*; sharp (needle,
etc.). Pa pwenti Dull.
pwenti 3
To cut to a point. Pale pwenti To speak
(enunciate) each syllable unnaturally, pedantically.
pwès, pwas attrib Thick; unrefined, rough.
pweson V pwason
pwezi a n Poetry*.
pwezon V pwazon
159 R
pyafe vi To stomp, to stamp, to paw the ground
(jumping up and down and making a lot of
noise).
pyan an n Yaws (generally crab yaws, an infectious
tropical skin disease characterized by strawberrylike
excrescences mostly on the feet but particularly
by hyperkeratoris with fissuring and ulcer
formation).
pyange vi To get along, to struggle, to eke out a
living.
pyanis la n Pianist*.
pyano a n Piano*. One of many Italian musical
terms used almost universally. The complete
Italian word is: pianoforte. Some languages
adopted ‘piano’, some ‘forte’. Italian, being
more conscious of the original meaning, usually
keeps the full form.
pyapya a, tipyapya a n Little people, small child.
pyas la n 1. Gourde ($0.20). Piastre*. Monetary
unit of exchange originating in Italy and spreading
throughout the world. 2. Also kind of disease
of the scalp.
pye 1
a n Foot (limb, measurement), hoof. A
pye On foot. Pye bèf Cow’s foot. Pye chik Sore
feet. Pye ni Barefoot. (Rare for “pye a tè”). Sou
pye Standing. Je pye Ankle bone. Leve sou de pye
militè (V militè). Manje a kwaze pye sou lestonmak
mwen That meal gave me an indigestion. M’di pye
sa’m manje m’pa ba ou I immediately started to
run like crazy. Plan pye Sole of the foot. Wete klou
nan pye chwal la Pull the nail out of the horse’s
hoof. Li gen pye poudre He loves to walk (He has
dusty feet). Koupe pye Not to go anymore where one
used to go. Tout moun danse sou yon pye Join in,
follow the crowd. Trese pye To walk crooked. Pa
mete pye yon kote Not to go somewhere. Pye a tè
Barefoot. Pye sal la Bum, good for nothing. Si
botin nan trò jis, pito ou rete pye atè If your high
shoes are too tight, it is better you be barefoot. Anvi
pye bèf Hairlip (malformation of the lip). Ou ap
jennen pye’m You are in the way, you are a hindrance.
M’suiv li pye pou pye I followed him close behind
his heels. Goumen mete pye A fight started. Mete
pye nan dlo To have recourse to a Vodou priest. Li
gen pye dous He has tender feet. Li gen pye fere, li
pa bezwen soulye pou choute balon His feet are as
tough as iron, he does not need shoes to kick the
football. Li mouri lan pye travay li He died in the
line of duty; no surprise. It figures. Istwa a san
pye ni tèt That story does not make sense. Pran pye
sou yon moun To unduly assume authority over s.o.
pye 2
Tree. Pye koton Cotton tree. Pye kòk (or)
pye kokoye Coconut tree.
pyè 1
a n Flint, flintstone.
Pyè 2
Peter*.
pyè 3
tonnè n Thunderstone, flint. Oungan gen
pyè tonnè nan peristil li pou’l fè renmèd The Vodou
priest has thunderstones in the peristyle to effect the
cure.
pyeatè Fè pyeatè To set foot on.
pyebwa a n Tree.
pyèj la n Trap, pitfall. Pran you moun lan pyèj
To entrap s.o.
pyèlanren n Gallstone.
pyèlwa n The old polished stones (usually axheads)
in which the loa resides; used in Vodou
ceremonies.
pyès 1
la n 1. Piece*. 2. Coin (change). 3. Room.
4. Clothes patch, piece (of goods). 5. Play (theater).
6. Part. You gro pyès fanm A huge hunk of
a woman. M’pral fè you pyès I am going to get a
piece. Yon pyès kannon A cannon.
pyès 2
No, none, not a; at all. M’pa pyès vòlè I
am not a crook at all. Pa gen pyès moun isi a
There is nobody here at all.
pyèsderechanj la n Spare part.
pyese vt To patch (clothing), to put a patch on,
to mend, to piece*.
pyete vi To measure the length or distance with
one’s feet.
pyeton an n Pedestrian*.
pyon an n Pawn*, piece, man. Pouse you pyon
To make a move; make a hint.
pyout (onom) Usually expressing the sound of
a kiss. Li fè travay li pyout He does his work
superbly.
R
ra 1
attrib Scarce, uncommon, rare*.
ra 2
adv At the level of, close to, even with; very
close to. Ra bò To the very edge, full. Ra bòday
To the brim. Oto a pase ra trou a, li manke tonbe
ladan’l The car passed very close to the hole; it
barely missed falling in. Avyon an pase ra tè The
plane flew close to the ground. Ra gagann Up to
the neck, completely, fully.
ra 3
adv Short. Li koupe cheve’l ra He cut his hair
very short.
rabache vt To botch.
rabadja vi To ramble (about), to talk nonsense.
rabat vt 1. To trim, to cut close, to beat* down.
Jeran an rabat zèb la nan jaden an The gardener
cut down the grass in the garden. 2. To hem.
rabè a n Reduction in price, discount.
rabi attrib Said of anything that has not yet
reached fruition, of a fruit that is not fully ripe;
an underdeveloped child; improperly cooked
food, beans etc.; not thoroughly washed clothes,
R 160
etc. Pat gen kont dife; sa fè pwa a rabi There was
not enough fire; that caused the peas not to be well
cooked.
rablabla V blabla
rabo a n Plane (tool), scraper. Cf. rap.
rabòday n Popular carnaval group in Port-au-
Prince.
rabonnen vt To botch up (hair). Kwafè a
rabonnen tèt mwen The barber gave me a bad haircut.
rabote vt To plane, to polish; to stomp, to
spade. Travayè yo rabote tè a pou yo plante pwa
The workmen spaded the ground in order to plant
peas. Ou rabote pye’m ak gro soulye ou la You
stomped my foot with your big shoe.
raboure vt To plow, to scratch the ground; to
turn up dirt as pigs do. To scold with harsh
words. Machann nan raboure madanm nan poutèt
li achte nan men’l, li pa paye’l The saleswoman
scolded the lady, because she bought from her, and
did not pay her.
rach la n Ax (for felling trees). Cf. Hatchet*.
rache vt To tear out, to chop up, to cut up, to
grind, to extract (tooth), to uproot. To snatch;
to pluck (feathers).
rachèt la n Hatchet*.
rachitik, rachetik attrib Rickety*, sickly.
rachonnen, rachennen, ranchonnen vt To hack,
to chop up (into small pieces), kill, assassinate.
Yo rachennen msye ak kout kouto; li pat vle bay kòb
ki te sou li They knifed the man to death, because
he would not give them the money he had on him.
rachòt la n Type of hatchet*.
rad la n Clothes, dress, garb, garment. Rad la
griyen dan’l The clothes are really thread-bare. Rad
mò a The shroud. Rad makak Convict’s uniform.
Ala bèl rad ou gen sou ou! Konben ou achte’l?
What a beautiful dress you have on! How much did
you pay for it?
rada a n Vodou dance rhythm; type of Vodou
service, a species of Vodou gods. From: Arada.
radada vi To babble, to talk nonsense.
radas la n Ravine. Cf. bafon.
radi 1
a n Radish*. Raphanus sativus L.
radi 2
, hadi attrib Impudent, bold, insolent,
impertinent, disrespectful. Hardy*. Ou pa manke
radi You sure got a nerve.
rado a n 1. Raft. 2. You rado A large amount, a
great number, a flock of, a lot of, a great deal
of. M’ap ba ou you rado kout pwen I am going to
beat the hell out of you with my fist.
radòt la n Nonsense, nonsensical idea. Fè radòt
To rave. Poukisa tout radòt sa yo? M’pa konprann
anyen What is all that nonsense? I do not understand
a thing. M’pa nan radòt, kenbe mo ou, pa ban’m
manti I am not fooling. Keep your word and stop
lying.
radotay la n Blabbering.
radote vi To rave, to dote*, to talk nonsense.
Nan diskou li a, li radote plis pase li di bagay serye
In his speech all he did was ramble. Si ou radote
nan zòrey mwen ou a fè’m pa chita kote ou If you
keep on talking nonsense, I will not sit next to you.
radotè a n Big talker, one who talks a lot (but
will not do anything; one who talks nonsense).
radyatè a n Radiator*.
radyès la n Insolence, impertinence, effrontery,
rudeness. Sa se radyès pèmèt This is the height of
insolence.
radyo a n Radio*, radio set.
radyografi a n X-ray (picture).
raf la n Raffle*.
rafal la n Gust (of wind), blast, hail (of bullets).
Yon rafal Lots of, a great quantity of.
rafistole V rapistole
rafle vt To raffle*.
rafrechi 1
a n Refreshing herb drink. Refreshment*.
Kokoye se bon rafrechi Coconut milk is a good
refreshment.
rafrechi 2
vt To freshen*, to refresh*, to cool off.
Rafrechi lizyè To clear again the boundary of a
property (or) to repair the fence. Rafrechi tèt A
ritual bath for refreshing the loa in one’s head
(COURLANDER). vi To become (get) cooler.
rafrechisan attrib Refreshing*.
rafrechisman an n Cool drink.
ragou a n Stew, ragout*. Fè you ragou To make a
stew.
raj la, laraj, laray n 1. Madness, rage*, fury. Se
laraj! It is terrible! It is extraordinary. Se laraj lè
de moun renmen It is wonderful when two persons
are in love. Pa konprann ou ap pase raj ou sou
mwen Do not think that you are going to spill your
venom on me. 2. Rabies*.
raje a n Underbrush, bush, shrub, weeds; thicket.
V bousay, matoral. Yo kraze raje They took to
the woods. They run away. Ale nan raje pran kèk
fèy pou fè te pou li Go in the bushes and pick some
leaves so that I can make him some tea.
rajeni vi To become, look younger. Li vin
rajeni; m’pa rekonèt li He looks so young; I did not
recognize him.
rak 1
la n Brushwood. Rak bwa Bush, forest.
Tout gason lan zòn nan kraze rak All the men in
the area ran away. Li te al chase nan rak la He
went hunting in the bushland. Pran rak To take to
the hills, to flee.
161 R
rak 2
attrib Sour, bitter (applies often to fruit that
is not ripe).
rakèt la n 1. Tennis racquet*. 2. Prickly pear,
nopal, a cactus with leaves resembling a racket*.
Euphorbia lactea Haw. P. V chandelye, kandelab.
Rakèt panyòl A medicinal plant.
rakle 1
a n Thrashing, drubbling, beating. Si ou
pa etidye leson ou, m’ap ba ou you rakle makak
anvan ou ale lekòl If you do not study your lesson, I
will give you a good thrashing before going to school.
rakle 2
vt To scrape. Rakle tè ak yon rato To rake
the dirt.
rakle 3
vi To be in the throes of death, to rattle.
M’al wè yon moun malad. Lè m’rive, m’jwenn li ap
rakle, li tapral mouri I went to see a sick person.
When I arrived I found him in the throes of death.
rakò a n Joint (plumbing).
rakokiye V akokiye
rakomode vt To mend (clothes).
rakonte vt To narrate, to tell.
rakousi 1
a n Short cut.
rakousi 2
vt To shorten, to abridge.
rakwen an n Far, hidden, forgotten corner. Old
hole where one should not be.
ral la, hal la n Building (usually one-storey)
used for business, store, plant, warehouse.
ralba a n Humdinger. Cf. siyekole.
rale 1
, hale vt 1. To pull, haul*. Li rale kò’l He
got out, he left. Rale monte To pull up (water from
a well, etc.). 2. To massage. vi 1. To crawl
(child). 2. To hobble. Li rale sou you pye (When
he walks), he drags one foot. Rale mennen kase
One thing led to the other, until...
rale 2
attrib Drawn in, emaciated (face).
ralfò V alfò
ralonj la n Extension (cord, piece, etc.).
ralonje vt To tie one piece of cord (object) to
another so as to lengthen it, to lengthen.
ram nan, ranm nan n Oar.
ramak V amak
raman adv Seldom, rarely*.
rame vt To row (a boat). vi To fail an exam
(in the North only). Usual term: pa pase.
ramo a n Small branch.
ramye a, ranmye a n Ring-dove, wood pigeon.
M’al lachas maten an; mwen tire 6 ranmye I went
hunting this morning; I shot six wood pigeons.
ran an n Row; rank; line. V grad. Ou toujou
bezwen nan ran You always have to get into the act.
Ret an ran Stay in line. Mete’n an ran Fall in
(milit). De ran dlo kouri lan je’l Tears ran down
his eyes.
ranboure vt To stuff, pad (a chair).
ranbouse vt To repay, refund, reimburse*.
ranch la n Hip. Cf. Haunches*. M’pran yon so
sou ranch mwen I fell down on my hips.
randevou a n Appointment, rendezvous*, clandestine
meeting.
randi V andui
randman an, rannman an n Yield, return, profit,
good result(s). Abitan di li mete pitit li lekòl, se
pou’l bay rannman The farmer said that he put his
child in school so that he should do well. Radyo’m
nan bay bon rannman My radio is working well.
randuisay la, randisay n Coating, wall finish;
plastering. Also randui, andwisay.
ranfò a n 1. Reinforcement*. 2. Counter (of
shoes).
ranfòse vt To reinforce*, to fortify, to strengthen.
ranje 1
a n Row, line (chairs, etc.).
ranje 2
vt To fix (in all meanings), to arrange*,
to settle; to prepare; to repair; to manage; to
straighten out; to poison; to give a surplus, a
little extra (for good measure). Examples and
expressions: Ranje’l ban mwen Give me good
measure. V barad, degi. Byen ranje Neat. Ranje
kabann To make the bed. Ou panko ranje kouvè
pou nou manje You did not set the table for us to
eat. Manje a ranje The food has been ‘fixed’; it can
harm or even poison.
ranjman an n Bonus.
ranka V renka
rankè a n Rancor*.
rankin nan n Rancor*, spite, grudge, resentment.
M’ganyen’l rankin I bear him a grudge.
rankont la n Meeting. Encounter*. Yè swa m’fè
rankont ak ansyen mennay mwen nan bal Last
night I met my old girlfriend at a dance.
rankontre, kontre vt To meet, to run across, to
come across, to run into. Cf. E. encounter*.
Si ou rankontre tonton ou lavil la, di’l m’ap tann li
isit la If you meet your uncle downtown, tell him
that I am waiting for him here.
ranmak V amak
ranmase, ramase vt To pick up, to gather, to
collect; to put aside, hoard. Ranmase tout mango
yo byen vit, lapli pral tonbe Gather up all the
mangos, it is about to rain.
rann vt 1. To make, to cause to be; to give back;
to vomit. Rann vizit To visit, to call on. Examples
and expressions: Doktè a ba li yon remèd pou’l
rann pwazon li te bwè a The doctor gave him a
R 162
medicine to make him vomit the poison he had drunk.
Rann yon sèvis To render* a service. Madanm nan
fè foskouch, li rann san The woman had a miscarriage;
she lost a lot of blood. Pwason an rann mwen malad
The fish made me sick. Rann yon repons To give
an answer. Rann kont To give an account(ing), to
make a report, to be responsible. M’granmoun. M’pa
gen pou’m rann kont bay pèsonn I am 21. I do not
have to account to anyone. Rann ou katedral Get to
the cathedral. Rann sèvis bay chagren While rendering
a service you may get into trouble. Li fè sa
san rann li kont He did it unconsciously. Li rann
tèt li He surrendered. Tigason an rann vè The boy
evacuated some worms. vi To produce, to yield.
Rekòt la pa rann The harvest did not produce
much.
rannafle vi To snore very loudly. Ronfle is the
usual word.
ranni, hanni vi 1. To neigh, to bray. 2. To talk
loud, to make a lot of noise.
rannman V randman
ranpe vi To creep, to crawl.
ranpè a n Flatterer, bootlicker.
ranplase vt To replace*, to substitute; to stand
for.
ranpli vt To fill; to fulfill; to comply with (a
duty). Li ranpli tout fòm yo He made out all the
forms.
rans 1
la n Nonsense, joke, trivialities. Ase di
rans Stop talking nonsense. Ase fè rans Stop
acting funny (make up your mind).
rans 2
attrib Rancid, stale, spoiled, sour (butter);
stupid (person). Li gen yon gou rans It has a
stale, rancid taste. Blag la rans The joke is not
funny.
ranse vi To chatter, to be kidding, to joke,
gossip. Ou kwè se ranse m’ap ranse? You think
that I am joking? Timoun pa ranse ak paròl ki sòti
nan bouch granmoun, ou konprann? Children do
not make fun of words spoken by adults, do you
understand?
ransè a n Joker, person who is no good, a
babbler, not serious. Tout moun konnen li se
ransè Everybody knows he is not serious.
ranseye vt To give information.
ransèyman an n Information. Pran ransèyman
(sou) To inquire (about), seek information concerning,
to make inquiries (about).
rant la n Revenue, income (other than salary).
rantre vt To bring something back in, to put
inside, to pull in. Rantre vant ou Pull your
stomach in. vi To reenter*, to go back in, to
return; to get in, to enter even for the first time.
Often a synonym for “antre”. Si ou ale ozetazini
semèn sa a, kilè ou ap rantre an Ayiti ankò If you
go to the United States this week, when will you
come back to Haiti? Yon bagay ki konn rantre
tankou zong chat Something which can pull in like
a cat’s paw.
ranvèse vt To spill over, to run over; to knock
down.
ranvwa a n Belch. Fè you ranvwa 1. To belch.
2. To cast a spell on someone, to send him away.
(Vodou term).
ranvwaye, ranvoye vt 1. To dismiss (maid, employee),
to send away, to chase away. 2. To
postpone, to adjourn, to defer, to put off. Also
Vodou term.
ranyon an n Tattered rags, trash. An ranyon
Ragged (clothed in rags).
rap la n Scraper, snowball scraper; rasp*, grater
for grinding nutmeg, manioc, etc. Cf. rabo,
graj.
rapadou a n Sugar cane syrup. Hard rolls made
from syrup (by boiling sugar cane). In many
places it serves as a substitute for sugar. Ban’m
pa’m san dous; m’a mete rapadou ladan Give me
mine without sugar; I will add “rapadou” to it. (A
takeoff from a famous song).
rapas attrib Greedy.
rape vt 1. To rebuff, to snap back gruffly. 2. To
seize (violently), snatch, nab. Poukisa ou rape
mont la nan men’m konsa? Why did you snatch the
watch from my hand? 3. To grate (ice). Otherwise
“graje” is used (pepper, nutmeg, manioc).
rapèl la n Call to work, made with the drums
(COURLANDER).
rapid attrib Speedy, fast, swift, rapid*.
rapidfaya adv Extremely fast. V rapidopresto.
rapidite a n Swiftness, speed.
rapidman adv Fast, quickly, swiftly, rapidly*.
V vit.
rapidopresto adv Fast, quickly, swiftly, rapidly*.
rapin n L’ap fè rapin He is grabbing everything.
He is looting.
rapistole, rafistole vt To mend, patch up. Li
rapistole vye soulye’l He patched up his old shoes.
raple (vpr) To remember, to recollect, to recall.
M’raple’m I remember.
rapò a n 1. Report*, story. 2. Relation, connection.
2. Litter (of animals). 3. Yield, income. 4. Burp,
belch. Examples and expressions: Kabrit la
pèdi rapò li The (nanny) goat lost (aborted) the
kid. Pa fè’m rapò Do not tell me about him; do not
tell on him (her, them). M’pral fè rapò pou ou
lapolis poutèt ou bat nonm nan I am going to report
you to the police because you beat that man. Pa rapò
a As compared to, in comparison with. Pòl pa gen
anpil lajan; men pa rapò a Jan, li rich Paul does
not have much money, but in comparison to John he
is rich.
163 R
rapòte vi To yield (fruit, etc.); give (render),
produce, bring in; to report*, repeat. L’al rapòte
bay patron an tou sa ouvriye yo fè He went to report
to the boss everything the workers did.
rapòtè a n Spy, informer.
rapouswiv 1
la n A type of ‘tablet’ (type of
coconut cake).
rapouswiv 2
vt To pursue (to go after). vi To
continue, to go on.
raproche vt To bring near.
rapya a, rapyay la n Worthless, ordinary, vulgar
person. Ti rapya Small children.
rara a n 1. Rattle, noise maker; Also rarabwa
and rarafèblan. 2. Popular street dance during
the Holy week, the Lenten festival. Vwa rara
Raucous, loud harsh voice. Tonbe nan rara To fall
on evil days. An Ayiti se Leyogàn ki gen pi bon rara
In Haiti the best rara takes place in Leogane. (fig)
Yon rarabwa A very talkative person.
rarabwa V rara
ras la, laras n 1. Race*. Ras blanch White race.
2. Breed, kind, species. Relatives, family. Gen
bon ras moun, men se lè ou viv ak yo ou konnen yo
There are good people, but it is only when you live
with them, that you get to know them. Malfini
manje tout ras poul ki te genyen (or) malfini kaba
ras poul (yo) The hawk exterminated all the chickens.
3. Yon ras A lot, a large quantity, a great number.
rasanble, sanble vi To gather, to convene, to get
together, to assemble*, to cluster, to congregate.
vt To collect, to put together. Pou ou kuit
manje, fò ou sanble dife To cook a meal, you have to
gather the fire (to pile up the coal or sticks and start
the fire).
rasanbleman an n Gathering, assembling*, rally-
ing.
rasazye attrib To be filled with food (person); to
get tired of, to be fed up with. Cf. E. satiated*.
rasi attrib Stale. Also applied to a person who is
physically not fully developed for his age; under-
developed.
rasin nan n Root; origin.
rasire vt To reassure*.
raso a n Whip.
rasyon an n Rations*.
rat la n Rat; loose woman. Kwafè a fè chemen rat
lan tèt mwen The barber botched up my hair. Rat
mode soufle Hypocrite. Pale angle pase rat To
speak English like a native. Rat, rat, rat, m’voye
you bon dan ba ou. Voye you move dan pou mwen
This is what a child is taught to say when a tooth
has fallen out. In Cuba they say Ratoncito,
ratoncito, toma tu diente y dame el mío It
seems that in India, and many, many other countries
similar sayings exist. In Salerno, children
are taught to say Titte, titte, titte, (‘tetto’), t’èccoti
lu stuorto, e ménami lu dritto. (R.G.U.).
rata You rata A lot of, many.
ratatouy la n Canaille, people of no consequence,
insignificant person.
rate 1
a, rarte n Scarcity, shortage. Rarity*.
rate 2
vt To miss. Rate kou (or) manke kou To
lose an opportunity.
ratelye a n Denture. Also fo dan.
ratman an n Misfire. Bay ratman To misfire.
rato a n Rake.
ratresi, retresi, tresi vi To contract, shrink, recede,
take in (clothes), to become narrower, smaller.
Kon mwa mas rive larivyè ratresi; lapli pa tonbe
When March rolls around, the stream gets drier and
drier (shrinks), because there is no rainfall.
ratyè a n Rat*-trap.
ravaj la n Damage. Fè ravaj To cause damage, to
lay waste.
ravaje vt To lay waste, ravage*, decimate, pillage,
sack, beat up.
ravajè attrib Destructive (person).
ravèt la n Cockroach (the large type common in
U.S.). Ravèt blanch la Albino.
ravin nan n Ravine*, hollow, gulley.
ravitaye vi To collect, to gather what is needed.
To amass, store food. Myèl yo ap ravitaye The
bees are gathering pollen to make honey.
rawn nan n Round* (in boxing).
ray la n Track. Rail*. Tren an pèdi ray, l’al frape
you kamyon sou rout li The train left the track and
collided with a truck in its path.
rayi vt To hate*. Youn rayi lòt They hate each
other.
rayisab attrib Selfish, egotistical; hateful. L’ap fè
rayisab He acts in a selfish manner. Se moun
rayisab He is an envious person.
rayisman an n Hate, envy.
raz attrib 1. Boring, worthless, uninteresting, annoying,
dull. 2. Short. Pwèl raz Short pubic hair.
3. prep Close to. Li pase raz mi an He passed
close to the wall. Cf. ra.
raze vt 1. To shave; to come very close to while
passing, to brush by. Oto a raze trotwa a The car
was traveling close to the sidewalk. Avyon an raze
tèt kay yo The plane flew close to the housetops.
2. To have intercourse with.
razè attrib Broke, out of funds, miserable, destitute.
M’razè jodi a; m’pa konnen ki rout pou’m fè pou’m
jwenn you kòb prete I am really broke today; I do
not know where to turn to borrow some money.
R 164
razibis vt To grab, to steal.
razwa a n Razor*.
re a n Ray*, skate ( a fish). Pwason re gen bon
gou, pechè yo pa pote semèn sa a Rays are tasty,
but the fishermen did not bring any this week.
rebat vt To reshuffle.
rebèl attrib Reticent, rebellious*. Fè rebèl To
refuse, to be reticent, to rebel violently. Tifi a pa vle
obeyi’m ankò, l’ap fè rebèl The girl does not obey
me anymore. She has become rebellious.
rebelyon an n Rebellion*, uprising. Li an rebelyon
He is rebelling.
rebise vi To repeat once again.
rebitan attrib Disgusting, sickening.
rebite vi To be repelling (to somebody). Soup
la rebite’m The soup is sickening to me.
rebò a n Edge, rim, brim. Border*. Rebò fenèt
Window-sill. M’pote asyèt labouyi a nan rebò pou’m
pa boule paske’l cho I hold the plate of porridge on
the rim, so I won’t get burned, because it’s hot.
rebondi vi To bounce* back (rubber ball).
Moris choute boul la nan mi an, li rebondi; li pran’l
nan tèt Morris kicked the ball against the wall. It
bounced back and hit him in the head.
rebyen To become friends again, to make up.
Nou te byen, nou fache, nou rebyen We were friends;
we had a falling out; now we are friends again.
rechaje vt To recharge*, to reload.
rechanj la, rechany n 1. Suit (of clothes). More
and more being replaced by kostim. 2. Derechanj
Spare. Pyès derechanj Spare parts.
rechap n Salvation. San rechap No escape; without
salvation.
rechèch la n (Re)search*.
rechiya attrib Whimpering, sniveling, mumbling.
Used to describe children who mumble (cry)
for no reason at all. Ala timoun rechiya, you ti
kou mwen ba li, li rele pou granmesi Look at that
cry-baby. I barely touched him, and he keeps on
crying for nothing.
rechiyen vi To cry, to be sullen. Poukisa pitit la
ap rechiyen tout tan? Li gen lè malad Why is that
child always crying? Maybe he is sick.
recho a n Trivet, brazier, charcoal burner, stove.
Ou nan recho You are in trouble. Pa achte recho ki
fèt ak tòl; yo pa bon Do not buy a brazier made out
of tin; they are not good.
recholye a n Stove maker, coppersmith who
makes braziers.
rèd attrib 1. Tough, cunning, shrewd, smart.
2. Hard to handle, problem (child). 3. Hard,
stiff, drastic, unyielding, rigid*, straightforward,
unwieldy, taut. Kò’l vin rèd His body stiffened.
Rèdchèch Completely. Li mouri rèdchèch He became
cold (stiff). Sa ki pi rèd la What is worse. Kenbe
kò ou rèd Stand up straight. M’tire you sèl kou;
pentad la mouri rèd I fired one shot, and the guinea
hen died cold.
redengòt la, rendengòt la n Frock-coat. Cf. E.
Riding coat*.
redesann vi To come down again.
redi 1
vt To pull. vi To strive, to work hard
(at).
redi 2
attrib Drawn in (face).
redi 3
vt To say again.
reditil attrib Hardheaded, disobedient, stubborn.
redonn, rendong, rondong attrib Hardheaded,
disobedient, rebellious.
redui, redwi vt To reduce*, to curtail. vi 1. To
decrease. 2. To become emaciated.
refè vt 1. To do again, to remake; to reproduce.
Refè travay la; li pa bon Redo the work, it is not
good. 2. To heal, to restore, to make one feel
better after an illness, to make one get well and
recover. Se medikaman sa a ki refè’m It was this
medicine that restored me. M’refè apre twa mwa
maladi I am recovered now after being ill for three
months. Yon ti refè An amelioration (after an
illness).
refi a, refiz la n Refusal*.
refijye, refije vi To take refuge*.
refize, derefize vt & vi To resist, to be unwilling
to, to reject, to refuse. Refize bay To withhold.
Boulon an refize sòti The bolt just would not come
out.
reflechi vi To reflect*; to ponder. Sa ou ap
reflechi konsa? What are you thinking about?
refleksyon an n Reflection*; thought. M’tande’l
fè you refleksyon I heard him express a thought.
refwadi, rafredi vi To cool (off), to chill.
refwadisman an n Chill (sickness).
règ la n 1. Rule. Nan règ Properly. 2. Ruler.
3. Menstruation, menstrual period. Also lin.
rega a n Look.
regadan attrib Said of someone who will not give
you anything unless you give him something; or
if he gives you something, he wants something
in return.
regade, gade vt To concern. V konsène, gade.
Sa pa gade’m (or) Sa pa regade’m That does not
concern me.
regilye attrib Regular*.
regle vt 1. To settle, put in order. 2. To get at,
to get even with (take vengeance on). 3. To
check, to count, to reckon. 4. To regulate*. Li
165 R
fache you fache; li mete fi a deyò; li di’l l’ape regle’l
He was quite angry. He put the woman out, and
said he would fix her. N’ap regle kòb la pou nou wè
si’l kont We will count the money to see if it is
enough.
regleman an n Accounting, i.e. settlement of
accounts; regulation*. Mwen pral fè regleman I
am going to balance our accounts. Mande regleman
To ask for an accounting.
reglis la, legliz n Licorice* (medicinal plant).
regou V egou
regrèt, regrete vt To be sorry, to regret*. Ala
regrèt m’regrèt sa What a shame! I am so sorry.
regretan attrib Regrettable*. Se regretan sa pou
n’antere Sole It is regrettable to bury Sole (from a
song). Ala regretan! What a shame!
regrete V regrèt
rejè a n Discards, rejects*.
rejete, rejte vt To reject*. vi To renounce (in a
religious sense). c. 1943, there occurred a
formal campaign by the Catholic church asking
all the faithful to reject all heretical beliefs. M’rejte,
m’pap sèvi lwa ankò I rejected the Vodou gods;
I no longer serve them.
rejim nan n 1. Bunch (of bananas). 2. Diet.
Doktè’m mete’m nan rejim My doctor put me on a
diet.
rejiman an n Regiment*. You rejiman Many a, a
large group of, a lot of. M’wè yon rejiman moun
nan mòn nan; m’pa konn ki kote yo prale I see a
group of people on the mountain; I do not know
where they are going.
rejis la n Register*, registry* (book). V batistè.
Mouche di pitit la pa pou li; li pa ba li rejis (batistè)
The man says that the child is not his, he will not
recognize him legally.
rejte, rechte vt To reject*. vi To throw up, to
vomit.
rejwenn vt To go back to, to reunite with, to
rejoin*.
rejwi vi To rejoice*, to be cheerful, to be delighted.
vt To make happy. Bon nouvèl sa a rejwi tout
moun nan peyi a The good news made every one
rejoice.
rejyon an n Region*, area.
rèk, hèk attrib 1. Said of fruit which have reached
an advanced stage of maturity to the point where,
if picked and placed under proper temperature,
they can ripen. 2. Crude. Kreyol rèk Crude
Creole.
rekalsitran, kalsitran attrib Moun pa renmen wè
timoun kalsitran People do not like to see children
who are obstinate, and are always kicking.
reken an n Shark; loan shark.
rekile, kyoule, tchoule, tyoule vi To move back,
to retreat, step back, walk back(wards), back
up. Cf. E. recoil*. (syn) fè bak. Kou chat wè
chen li kyoule When a cat sees a dog, she starts
backing up.
reklam nan n Advertising, advertisement. Fè
reklam pou To advertise, to promote, to boast about
something.
reklamasyon an n Claim*, complaint. Fè reklamasyon
To lay claim to, to claim one’s due.
reklame vt To claim*. Mèt zafè reklame zafè’l, se
pou ou ba li’l When the owner asks for his property,
you must give it to him.
rekò a n Record*. First place. Li pote rekò He
is tops. Li bat rekò a He topped the record.
rekòlt la, rekòt n Harvest, crop. Anpil abitan ap
ride Jozèf fè rekòt Many other farmers are helping
Joseph harvest his crops. Ane sa a gen you bèl rekòt
kafe nan nò This year they had a fine coffee harvest
up North.
rekòlte vt To harvest, reap. Also fè rekòt.
Kouzen Andre rekòlte anpil mayi ak pitimi Cousin
Andrew harvested a lot of corn and millet.
rekòmandasyon an n Recommendation*.
rekòmande vt 1. To recommend*. 2. To register
(a letter).
rekòmanse, rekonmanse vt & vi To start again,
to resume, to begin again.
rekondui, rekondi vt To show out (a visitor).
rekonesan attrib Grateful.
rekonesans la n Gratitude.
rekonèt, rekonnèt vt 1. To recognize*, to detect.
2. (pop) To know a person; to meet (to make
the acquaintance of). 3. To officially recognize
(acknowledge) a child as one’s own (with reference
to one born out of wedlock), to accept
legal responsibility for one’s own child (born
out of wedlock).
rekonpans la n Reward, recompense*, prize.
rekonpanse vt To reward, to recompense*.
rekonsilyasyon an n Reconciliation*.
rekonsilye vi To make up, to reconcile*.
rekouche vi To go back to bed.
rekoud vt To sew up again.
rekreasyon an n Class recess, recreation*.
rèl la, hèl n Scream, cry, shout, howl, yell,
weeping. M’tande rèl nan mòn nan; gen lè sò
Nenèt mouri I hear weeping in the hills; it seems
that sister Antoinette died. Fè you rèl To utter a
cry; to shout, to yell. Li fè you rèl sou mwen He
yelled at me.
R 166
relasyon an n Important connections; relation*,
relationship*. Ki relasyon ou ak li? How do you
get along with him? What are your connections
with him?
rèldo a, rèl do a n Area of the spine. V chini
do.
rele, ele vi 1. To yell, to shout, scream, to cry
(out). 2. To be called, to be named. vt 1. To
call, to name s.o. 2. To hail* (a taxi, car, etc.).
3. To call (to summon). Examples and expressions:
Ki sa ou rele yo? What do you call them?
Kòman ou rele? What is your name? Lajan’m
rele’m se pa’m I can do what I want with my own
money. Rele fò To roar, shout. Yo rele’m Fayo
My name is Raphael. Se pou ou rele sou kò ou You
have to make an effort, to strive, to force yourself.
Rele sou... To shout at, to yell at... Dyòl li rele’l se
pa’l He is a good talker. He is master of his
tongue. He does whatever he wants with his mouth.
Rele dèyè To get after (to tell someone to behave).
releng 1
lan n A strip, a small piece. Also
filang. An releng 1. In rags. 2. Furtively.
releng 2
refl v To hide one’s self from s.o. Li
dwe mekanisyen an, se pou sa l’ap releng kò li He
owes the mechanic some money; that is why he is
hiding from him.
relijye attrib Religious*, pious, devout.
relijyon an n Religion*.
relimen vt To put back on the light. Relimen
lanp la (ankò) Put on the light (again); rekindle.
relye vt To bind (book).
remak la n Observation, remark*. Fè remak To
observe, notice. Lapli a bay remak tonbe jodi a It
looks like rain today. Figi li bay remak li malad
He looks like he is sick.
remake vt To notice, to observe. To remark*.
Ki sa ou remake? M’remake li fè kèk jou li pa vini
lakay ou Did you notice anything? I noticed that he
has not visited you in the last few days.
remèd la, renmèd n Cure, remedy*, medicine.
Remèd fèy A natural country herb medicine, remedy*
(as opposed to pharmaceuticals). Rete se remèd kò
Calm down for your own good.
remedye vi To take medicine, to take drugs.
remere Vant a remere Sale with option to repurchase.
remèsi V remèsye
remèsiman an n Thanks.
remèsye, remèsi vt To thank.
remèt, renmèt vt To deliver, to remit*, to return,
to surrender, to give back, to get even with.
Remèt kou To return the blow. Remèt monnen To
give back the change. Yo remèt mwen monnen I got
change in return. Bay se bay, prete se prete; si ou
prete, fò ou remèt Giving is one thing, borrowing is
something else; if you borrowed it, you must return
it.
remete vt 1. To put back, to restore. Remete lòd
To restore order. Remete you bagay lan plas li To
put something back (where it was before). 2. To
wear again (clothes, hats).
remiz la n Garage to store automobiles.
remize vt 1. To park (to store) a vehicle in a
garage. Li remize machin nan bonè jodi a He
stored the car in the garage very early today. 2. To
discard, to dock, discontinue using. Soulye sa a
pa bon ankò; li lè pou remize li Those shoes are no
longer any good; it is time you throw them away.
remò a, renmò a n Remorse*.
remòke vt To tow, to tug.
remonte vt 1. To boost, to rehabilitate. Se pou
ou remonte moral li You will have to boost his
morale. Manje a remonte lestomak mwen The meal
has restored my strength. 2. To recondition
(shoes). Lè soulye ou la chire, pote’l kay you
kòdonnye lavil la pou remonte’l pou ou If your
shoes are coming apart, take them to the shoemaker
in town, so that he can repair them for you. 3. To
climb up again, to bring up again. M’monte
mòn nan you fwa, m’pa ka remonte’l ankò I climbed
that mountain; I cannot climb it again. vi To go
up again. Li plonje, li pa remonte He took a dive
and did not get up again.
remwe, remye vt To scratch, to stir, to agitate.
Remwe tè a anvan ou plante pwa ladan pou ou ka
gen bon rekòt Scratch the earth before planting
beans in order to get a good crop.
ren an n Loin(s), hip(s), kidney(s). Yo pete
(kase) ren’l They fired him. Ren pou ren Equally,
in equal parts, half and half.
rèn 1
nan, renn, larenn n Queen. Renn bouzen A
real whore. Rèn chantrèl Principal female singer
in a popular religious singing group or choir.
rèn 2
nan, renn nan n Reins* (for riding horses).
rende V ede
rendengòt V redengòt
renk Any, the slightest; only. Renk ti van kab
koule bato sa a The slightest wind can capsize that
boat. Renk Bondye ki konnen sa Only God knows
that.
renka 1
, ranka attrib Fearful, sly; apprehensive,
hesitant. Chwal la te renka The horse was sly.
renka 2
, ranka refl V To move, to move backwards.
Renka kò ou Move along.
renmèd V remèd
renmen 1
an n Love affair. Renmen an pat dire
The love affair did not last.
renmen 2
vt 1. To love. To like, to cherish, to
be fond of. M’pa renmen figi’l ditou I do not like
his looks at all; maybe he is sick. Pa renmen To
167 R
dislike. 2. To love to, to be in the habit of. Li
renmen gen maltèt He often has headaches. vi To
be in love, to love each other. Yo renmen They
love each other. Renmen ak To be in love with.
renmèt V remet
renn nan V rèn (1 & 2)
rennen 1
vt To hold back (the reins*). Rennen
chwal la, li galope tròp, ou a tonbe Hold back the
horse; he is galloping too much; you will fall down.
rennen 2
To stiffen one’s hips.
renome a n Reputation, fame, renown*.
renonse vt To renounce*.
rense vt 1. To rinse*. 2. To wash lightly, to
soak. M’rense kò’m I washed myself a second time.
rente, erente vt 1. To exhaust, to wear out.
2. To strain one’s self (for instance from physical
effort). M’te rente kò’m pou ou I worked my bones
off for you. 3. Stunted. Pye mango a rente, li pa
jwenn lapli The mango tree is stunted and did not
grow because there was no rain.
reny nan n Reign*. Administration.
renyen kay la n Back outside corner of a house.
repantans la n Repentance*.
repanti vi To repent*.
reparasyon an n Repair(s), repairing*.
repare vt To restore, to repair*, to mend; to
make amends.
reparèt vi To reappear*, to recur.
repase vt 1. To iron (clothes, hair). 2. To review,
to go over (one’s lessons). vi To pass* again.
repasèz la n Ironing woman.
repedale vi To take the road again. To start
again.
repete vt & vi To repeat*; to rehearse; to practice.
repetisyon an n Repetition*, rehearsal. Fè repetisyon
To rehearse, to practice.
repiblik la n Republic*.
repitasyon an n Reputation*, repute*.
repite attrib Notorious (for), of ill repute, generally
means ‘renowned’. Li repite pou sa He has that
reputation.
repiyan attrib Sickening, nasty (taste), repugnant*.
repiyans la n Disgust, repulsion, repugnance*.
Dlo repiyans Magic potion.
repiyen vt To be repugnant* (or) distasteful.
Manje sa a repiyen’m, li pa gen bon sant, li pa gen
bon gou That food is disgusting to me. It does not
smell good; it does not taste good.
replante vt To transplant*, replant*.
replen vt To refill.
repo a n Rest. Kite’m an repo! Leave me alone!
Leave me in peace!
repondong nan n Competence, ability to face a
situation.
reponn vt & vi 1. To answer, respond*, reply.
Reponn pou To answer for, to take responsibility
for. 2. To affect, to have a reaction. Bri a reponn
mwen nan tèt The noise had a reaction on my head.
repons la n Answer, response*.
repouse 1
vt To push* away, to repulse*, to
repel.
repouse 2
vi To grow again.
repoze 1
, poze vi To rest, to repose*.
repoze 2
vt To ask again. Li repoze kesyon an He
asked the question again.
repozwa a n An altar placed at various stopping
points during a procession, where the host is
laid while prayers are recited and religious hymns
are sung on special occasions. Also Vodou
term.
reprann vt To take (up) again, to regain, to
resume. Reprann konesans To regain consciousness,
to recover. Reprann travay apre vakans To resume
work after a vacation. Li reprann kò’l He came
back to his senses.
reprezantasyon an n Representation*. (pop)
Marriage proposal. Usual word however, is lade-
mann.
reprezante vt To represent*.
repròch la n Reproach*, blame.
reproche vt To blame, to reproach*. Reproche’m,
trè byen, men, m’pa fè manti Go ahead and blame
me, but I do not tell lies.
rès la n Remainder, rest*, residue, surplus, leftovers;
change (money). Li fè rès ak mwen He
strove (tried), begged and begged me to ... He did
his best to ... Rès manje Scraps, leavings. V merès.
resanblans la n Resemblance*. Likeness.
resansman an n Census*.
reselè a (male), reselèz la (female) n Fence,
receiver of stolen goods.
resemele vt To resole, to put on new soles.
resepsyon an n Reception* (party).
resèt la n Earnings, receipt*, money collected;
recipe*.
resevwa vt 1. To obtain, to receive*. 2. To serve
refreshments or food to guests, to welcome.
resi 1
a n Receipt*, acknowledgement of payment.
resi 2
V reyisi
R 168
resif la n Reef (of rocks). Obstacle. Monte sou
resif To fail.
resisite vi To resurrect*.
resite vt To recite*.
resiyòl V rosiyòl
reskape a n 1. A person rescued, survivor. 2. Type
of coconut brittle.
reskiyè a n Sponger, gate-crasher, parasite. Reskiyè
toujou ap siveye kote ki gen fèt pou yo ale Parasites
are always looking for receptions to attend.
reskonsab V responsab
reskonsablite V responsablite
resò a n (Metal) Spring; bed spring.
respè a, respe a n Respect*. “Sòf vòt respè” (or)
“Respè m’gen pou ou” (or) “Respè m’dwe ou” If
you allow me. Respè m’dwe figi ou With due
respect. Excuse the vernacular. Pardon my French.
Si ou vle viv byen pami moun, se fè respè ou If you
want to live well, keep your respect. Onè! Respè
(A visitor says ‘onè’, i.e. ‘Is anyone home’ and
the answer is ‘respè’, i.e. ‘Yes, and I salute you’).
respektab attrib Respectable*.
respekte vt To respect*.
respirasyon an n Breathing, respiration*.
respire vi To breathe.
responsab, reskonsab attrib Responsible*, liable.
responsablite a, reskonsablite n Responsibility*.
restan an n Remainder, rest*, left-over. Li pa
mete restan moun He will not wear second hand
things.
restavèk la, resavèk, retavèk n 1. Servant who
lives in. 2. One who will sell his soul (submissive).
Gran nèg yo gen anpil restavèk lakay yo
Rich people have a lot of servants who live in. M’pa
restavèk ou; pa rape boul la nan men’m I am not
your servant; do not snatch the ball out of my hand.
restoran an n Restaurant*, inn.
restrenn vt To restrain*, to hold back, to abridge,
to curtail, to curb, to restrict*.
ret Pretonic form for rete. Often used as auxiliary.
Never found at the end of a sentence. Ret trankil
Stop it. Keep quiet. M’sòti Pòtoprens m’pral Okap.
M’ret fè de jou Sen Mak I left Port-au-Prince heading
for Cape Haitian. En route, I stopped for two days
in Saint Marc. Jezi di veye, pa rèt ap dòmi [From
a song] Jesus said: Wake up. Do not sleep.
reta a n Delay. An reta Late, overdue (payment).
Fè reta To be late. Pa fè’m an reta; m’prese Do
not make me be late; I am in a hurry. Bay reta To
detain. Li toujou an reta He is always tardy*.
retape a n Type of hat.
retay la n Cuttings, i.e. pieces of material left
over after cuttings; scraps, remnant. Li koud tout
ti moso retay ki te ganyen, li fè you dra She sewed
all pieces of material that had been left over and
made a beautiful sheet with them.
rete, ret vi To remain, to stay, to halt, stop, to
continue to be; to live, inhabit; to be left (over);
to wait, to make a stop-over; to last. Examples
and expressions: Rete! What! (Interj. denoting
surprise). San rete Over and over. Rete dèyè To
fall behind. Ki bò ou rete? Where are you staying?
Where do you live? Rete avèk To live in with (as a
servant) . M’pa ret avè ou I do not have to listen
to you; I am not your servant. Rete dat To fix a
date. Rete pran To accept one’s fate; to stand for.
M’di ou li pral fè sa; rete gade, ou a wè I tell you
he is going to do that. Wait and see; you will find
out. Yon kay ki pa rete ak kay A house superior to
all others (beyond comparison). Tann you ti moman,
m’rete twa sak Wait a moment, I have only three
bags left. vt To stop. Si ou wè you machin, rete li
If you see a car, stop it.
retif attrib Unmanageable, restive*.
retire, wete vt To get out, to put off, to take
away, to get off; to take off (clothes, shoes), to
remove, to strip. Cf. E. retire*. To pull (out
of). To withdraw. To subtract. Retire nan
kòsay To get rid of (an undesirable person). Retire
bale sa a nan mitan chemen an Move that broom
from the middle of the road; move the broom out of the
way. Retire nanm The act of removing the soul
from a body (COURLANDER).
retni vt 1. To retain*. 2. To stop, to restrain, to
hold back, to hold up.
reto V retorik
retorik la, reto n Rhetoric* (senior year in high-
school).
retou a n Return*. Biye ale retou Round trip
ticket.
retounen, tounen vi To return*, to come back,
to go back, to get back.
retresi V ratresi
retrèt la n Retreat*; retirement, pension. Pran
retrèt To retire from work.
retrete vi To retire. Li mouri dezan apre li te fin
retrete He died two years after having retired.
retrouse vt To turn up (one’s sleeves).
rèv la n Dream. Rèv je klè Daydream.
revanch la, revanj n Revenge*, vengeance*. Pran
revanch To take revenge.
revandè a (male), revandèz la (fem) n Retailer,
vender*, salesperson.
revandikasyon an n (Just) Demand(s).
revann vt To resell.
169 R
reve vi & vt To dream. Sa ou reve? What did
you dream about?
revè a n 1. Change for the worst. Reverse*,
trouble, misfortune. 2. Underside of the lapel.
revenan an n The ghost of a dissatisfied person
who comes to haunt the living.
reverans la V lareverans
revèy 1
la n Alarm clock.
revèy 2
Ant somèy e revèy Still half asleep.
reveye vt To awaken, to wake up.
BEAUBRUN/A-7: Se tiye ou tiye’m, reveye ou
reveye’m nan You simply killed me by waking me
up. vi To wake up. M’reveye trò bonè I woke up
too early.
reveyon an n Christmas eve party.
revi a n Magazine, review*.
reviv vt To relive.
revni, revini vi To revive after fainting. To
come to. To regain consciousness. V konesans.
revokasyon an n Revocation*, dismissal, repeal.
revoke vt To fire (from employment). To dismiss,
disband, to revoke*.
revolisyon an n Revolution*, uprising.
revòlte, revolte vi To revolt*, to rebel, to rise
(kont, against).
revòlvè a n Gun, revolver*. You kout revòlvè A
gunshot.
reyaji vi To react*.
reyaksyon an n Reaction*.
reyalite a n Reality*. An reyalite Actually.
reyalize vt To accomplish, to materialize, to
achieve, to carry out (project), to bring about.
Anvan ou reyalize gro proje sa a ou gen pou fè anpil
efò Before succeeding in that project, you have to
exert a great effort. 2. To realize*. Ou pa reyalize
sa li di la a You do not realize what he said.
reyèl attrib Actual, real*, authentic, effective.
reyèlman, reyèlteman adv Really*. Reyèlman vre
In truth, truly.
reyini vt To put together, to assemble, to collect,
to gather. vi To come together, to unite*, to
meet, to congregate, to assemble, to collect, to
get together.
reyinyon an n Meeting, reunion*.
reyisi, resi vi To succeed, to be successful, to
“finally make it”. Se jodi m’ap soufri; m’resi fini
ak lekòl sa a I have been suffering such a long
time; I finally finished school. Plan’l yo pa reyisi
His plans fell through. Li reyisi lan komès He
prospers (succeeds) in business.
reyon 1
an n Ray*, beam.
reyon 2
X n X ray*.
reze vt 1. To raise* (in poker). 2. To con, to
sock it to s.o., to deceive with subterfuge.
rezen an n Grape(s); raisins*. Yon bwat rezen A
box of raisins. Also Rezen sèk Raisin. Pye rezen
Grape-vine. Jaden rezen Vineyard. An Ayiti se
Monwi ki fè pi bon rezen In Haiti, the best grapes
come from Monrouis. Rezen lanmè Sea-grape. Rezen
maron Dove plum.
rezèv la n Reserve*, reservation*.
rezèvasyon an n Reservation*. Fè rezèvasyon To
make a reservation.
rezève 1
vt To reserve*.
rezève 2
attrib Reserved*, polite, distinguished.
rezèvwa a n Tank, reservoir*. Plim a rezèvwa
Fountain pen.
rezilta a n Result*, outcome. Ki bay bon rezilta
Effective. San rezilta Fruitless.
rezistans la n Resistance*.
reziste vi To resist*, to withstand.
reziyen vpr To submit, acquiesce, to resign*
one’s self.
rezolisyon an n Resolution*.
rezon an, larezon n Reason*, motive. Gen rezon
To be right, to have the upper hand. Tire yon rezon
To draw lots. Se pa rezon pou There is no cause
to...
rezonab attrib Reasonable*.
rezone V rezonnen
rezònman an n Reasoning.
rezonnen 1
, rezone vi To reason*. Li rezonnen
byen; li pa di tenten He reasons well; he is not
talking nonsense.
rezonnen 2
, rezone vi To resound*.
rezoud vt To resolve*, to solve* (a problem).
To overcome (difficulties).
ri 1
a n Street. Ri senp One way street. V lari.
ri 2
a n Laughter, laugh.
ri 3
vi & vt To laugh, laugh at; to be hilarious.
Yo ri’m They laugh at me. M’tèlman kontan nouvèl
sa a, m’ri, m’ri jouk mwen kriye I was so happy
about what happened that I laughed “till I cried”.
Liv sa a fè moun ri anpil This book is very funny.
riban an n Ribbon*.
ribanbèl Reveling, feast. Fè ribanbèl To celebrate,
to carouse.
rich attrib Wealthy, rich*. Used only as an adj.
As a subs., use Moun rich A rich person. Tout
R 170
moun fèt pou viv, menm si li pòv, menm si li rich
Everyone has a right to live, be he rich or poor.
richa a n A very rich* person.
riche a n Beehive, apiary.
richès la n Wealth, riches*.
rid la n Furrow, wrinkle.
ride V ede
ridikil attrib Ridiculous*, ludicrous.
rido a n Curtain.
rif la n (Jack) plane (tool).
rigòl la n Ditch, canal, trench, gutter, drain.
rigwaz la, rigwèz n Whip, lash, horsewhip. V fwèt.
rigweze vt To whip, to lash.
rikannen vi To laugh, to grin.
rim nan n Head cold.
rimatis la n Rheumatism*.
rimay Fè rimay To make a movement, a gesture; to
make a move (toward).
rinen 1
vi To urinate*. (usu) pise, pipi.
rinen 2
V ruinen
rip la n Chips, wood shavings. Lè bòs la fin
rabote planch yo, pran rip yo mete yo nan glas la
pou’l pa fonn When the carpenter finishes planing
the boards, take the shavings and put them around
the ice, so it will not melt.
ripay la n Shavings.
riral attrib Rural*.
risk la, ris n Risk*.
riskan attrib Dangerous, risky*.
riske vt To venture, to risk*, to run a risk*, to
hazard, to imperil, to dare. Jozèf riske vi’l pou’l
sove papa’l Joseph risked his life to save his father.
rive vi 1. To happen, to occur, to take place, to
come about. 2. To arrive*; to get to (a place),
to reach (a place). 3. To befall. 4. To succeed
(in doing). Examples and expressions: Lè l’rive
Upon his arrival. Mwen te prèske rive lakay mwen
I almost reached my house. Rive yon lè There came
a time, at one point. Nou rive genyen We finally
won. Fè yon rive To go for a moment to a specified
place, to stop by.
rivèt la n Rivet*.
rivyè a, larivyè a n River*, stream, current, brook,
creek.
riz la n Trick, ruse*. Tout timoun gan riz All
children are artful and clever. Li aji ak riz He is
tricky.
rize attrib Cunning, tricky, wily, clever.
rizèz attrib Cunning, tricky (female).
rizib attrib Funny, laughable; ridiculous*. Bon,
pa fè rizib O.K. Stop playing around. M’ap di ou
yon bagay serye, ou ap fè rizib ak mwen I am
telling you something serious, and you are joking
with me. Yo pase’l nan rizib They made fun of him.
ro, wo attrib High, tall; loud. Mwen pi ro pase ou
I am taller than you. Pye bwadchenn nan ro, m’pa
konn otè’l The oak tree is tall but I do not know its
height.
ròb la, wòb la n Dress. Cf. E. robe*. Pran ròb
To take the veil, enter religious orders. Ròb jip a
kòsaj A two piece dress (blouse and skirt).
robinèt la, robinè, wobinèt la n Faucet, tap.
robis, wobis attrib Angry, rebellious, hard-headed.
Fè robis To be ill-bred, capricious, peevish. Ti
gason an robis; kon ou di’l you bagay, li toujou
move The boy is ill-mannered; if you say something
to him, he becomes moody.
ròch la, wòch la n Stone, rock, pebble. Ròch
galèt la Pebble; usually found in riverbeds.
ròchapyè a, ròch a pyè n Silex.
rodaye, wodaye vi To keep prowling, to run
around, to walk around. Vòlè yo ap rodaye bò
kay la The thieves are prowling around the house.
rode, wode vi To prowl.
rodonn, redonn, wodonn attrib Hard to handle,
churlish. Fè redonn To be disobedient, rebellious.
ròdpòte, wòdpòte, ròd, wòd adv Extremely, too
much, excessive; too far out of line. Anvan li fè
ti travay sa a, li pale ròd pòte, li parese Before
doing this little piece of work, he talks a lot. He is
just lazy.
rogatwa V ogatwa
ròkèt la, òkèt, wòkèt n Hiccup.
ròklò, wòklò attrib Rebellious, difficult, recalcitrant.
Fè ròklò To be rebellious.
ròl la, wòl la n Part, role*. Fè ròl ou (or) Rete
nan ròl ou Keep your distance. Do not get out of
place. Do not bother me. Yo pèdi ròl yo They acted
in a manner unbecoming to their station in life.
rololoy Beautiful! Magnificent!
ròm V ronm
roma a, ronma, woma, oma n Crayfish, lobster.
roman an, woman n Novel.
romans la n Love song.
romaren an, womaren n Rosemary* (plant).
ron 1
an, won an n 1. Ring, circle. 2. Dance.
3. A game: ring around the rosie, etc. Vire ron
To turn around* and around. Antre lan ron To get
in step, to do as the others are doing.
171 R
ron 2
, won, attrib Round*. Bwaron an A dugout
(canoe).
ron 3
, won adv Sharp, exactly (time).
rondèl la, wondèl la n A round* slice; (tech)
washer.
rondi, arondi vt To give a round* shape, to
round* out.
rondonmon, wondonmon Fè rondonmon To be
rebellious, to refuse to obey. Lè timoun fè rondonmon
se pou pini’l When a child refuses to obey, he should
be punished.
ronf lan, ronfle a, wonf lan, wonfle a n Snoring.
ronfle 1
, wonfle vi To snore.
ronfle 2
, wonfle vt To beat up.
ronje, wonje vt To gnaw.
ronm nan, ròm, wonm n Rum*.
ronma V roma
ronn nan, wonn n Round*(s); circle. Fè ronn
pye bwa a Go around the tree. Ronn kou Neck (of
an animal).
ronpi, wonpi vt To beat angrily and savagely. Si
ou pa koute sa m’di ou m’ap ronpi ou If you do not
listen to what I tell you, I will give you a good
thrashing.
ronronnen, wonwonnen vi To purr.
rons la, wons la n Briar, bramble.
ront 1
la, hont, wont n Shame, disgrace. Used
as an adjective: To be ashamed, shy, timid.
Mouri ront To die of shame. M’ront vin kote ou
ankò, tèlman ou rann mwen sèvis I am ashamed to
come to you again; you rendered me so many services.
Fè ront To shame, to put to shame.
ront 2
la, wont la, hont n Shame-weed, sensitive,
Mimosa pudica L.
ronte Shameful.
rontèz la, wontèz la, larontèz n Shame.
ronyay, wonyay A la ronyay On the sly. Li tap
mache a la ronyay pou moun pa wè si’l te la He
walked on tip toes, so people would not know if he
had been there.
ronyen, wonyen vt To gnaw, to nibble (on).
To clip, to pare by chewing off a bit at a time.
Li pito ronyen pen an pase li manje’l you sèl kou
He prefers to chew off the bread bit by bit rather than
eat it all at once. Cf. ronje.
ronz refl v To move, to budge. Nou ronz kò nou
We move ourselves.
roroli a, hoholi, wowoli n Sesame seed. ‘Jijiri’
in Southern Haiti; Sesamum orientale L.
ròròt, wòròt attrib 1. Childish, inexperienced.
2. Said of a fruit that has not yet reached its full
shape or maturity. Cf. Rèk, mi, jòn, vèt.
ròs la, wòs n 1. Increase, hike (in height, price,
etc.). 2. Lift in a shoe (movable sole).
rose, ose, wose vi To stand up on tiptoe (to
become taller momentarily by raising one’s self
either on tiptoes or on a prop). vt To shrug.
Rose zepòl To shrug one’s shoulders. V ise.
rosiyòl la, resiyòl, wosiyòl n Nightingale. Resiyòl
manje kòròsol Nightingales eat soursops (From a
popular children’s song).
rote, ote, wote vi To eruct*, to belch, to burp.
Cf. degobye. Rote si To belch, causing a sour
taste.
rotè a, wotè n Height. Lan rotè In the mountains.
roti 1
, woti vt To roast*.
roti 2
a, woti n Roast*.
rou 1
a, wou n Wheel, tire. Rou de rechanj Spare
tire. Kapo rou Hubcap.
rou 2
a, wou a n Hoe*.
rouch, wouch interj Yuck! Disgusting! Rouch!
Ala pousyè! Yuck! How dusty.
rouchin nan, wouchin n Whip (Long, thin,
flexible stick with all its branches used as a whip).
Si ou fè dezòd m’ap ba ou yon rouchin If you do not
behave, I am going to whip you.
rouj 1
, wouj attrib Red. Limyè a vin rouj The
(traffic) light turned red.
rouj 2
la, wouj n Rouge* (lipstick). Creole uses
also: roujalèv.
roujalèv la, woujalèv n Rouge* (lipstick).
rouji, wouji vi 1. To redden, become red. 2. To
blush. vt Rouji bouch To put lipstick on.
roukay la n Howling, crying, lamenting.
rouke, wouke vi According to folklore, the howl
of the dog when it thinks that it sees an evil
spirit. Chen an rouke tout lannuit; m’pa konn sa’l
te wè The dog howled all night long; I do not know
what it saw.
roukou a, woukou n Annatto, lipstick tree. Bixa
orellana L. Chany yo fè lank rouj ak roukou pou
netwaye soulye Shoe-shiners make red ink polish
from “anatto” to clean shoes.
roul Fè roul To roam about, to loiter, to have a good
time. Chak jou li sove nan klas, l’al fè roul nan
Bisantnè Everyday he skips (leaves) class and goes
loitering in the Bicentennial Quarter.
roule, woule vi 1. To roll*, to drive around. vt
1. To deceive. Yo roule’l He was taken in. Cf.
colloquial E. Do not let him roll* (deceive)
you. 2. To grind (corn). 3. To roll (a person
on the ground, etc.).
roulèt la, woulèt n Hem (of clothes).
S 172
roulib la, woulib n 1. Coasting. Fè roulib To
coast. 2. Lift, free ride. Mande roulib To ask for
a free ride, to hitchhike. Bay roulib To give a free
ride, a lift.
roulo 1
a, woulo n Roll* (film); roller*; reel*
(cinema). L’ap mete roulo lan cheve’l She is
putting her hair in rollers. V roulo konpresè.
roulo 2
konpresè a, woulo konpresè n Steamroller.
roulong nan, woulong n Mongoose. Roulong
manje poul The mongoose eats chickens.
rouspetay la, wouspetay la n Protest. Fè rouspetay
To protest.
rouspete, wouspete vi To protest, to complain.
rout la, wout la, larout n Road, way, trip, track,
route*. Al fè rout ou! Get out of here! An rout En
route, on the way. Fè rout (larout) avèk To accompany
s.o. on a trip or a walk.
routin nan, woutin n Routine*, practice. Li fè’l
pa routin He did it without studying, by practice, by
ear.
rouy 1
la V larouy
rouy 2
, wouy interj Ouch!
rouye, wouye vi To rust.
rouzay la, arozay n Watering.
rouze , aroze, awoze, wouze vt 1. To water, to
irrigate, to sprinkle, to baste. Rouze jaden an pou
fè bèl rekòt Water the garden, so you will have a
good crop. 2. To add sauce to a platter of food.
3. To beat up.
roy, woy Ouch! Alas!
royon an, ronyon, noyon n Kidney (animals).
royroy, woywoy attrib Raucous, uproar. Moun
royroy Boisterous people. Nan royroy sa a m’pa
konn sa pou’m fè With all that raucous, I do not
know what to do.
roz la 1
, ròz la, woz la n Rose*. Roz yo bèl nan
lakou a, plante toujou pou yo ka anpil The roses in
the garden are beautiful; plant some more so you
will have plenty.
roz 2
, ròz, woz attrib Rosy*, pink. Manmzèl abiye
an roz jodi a, se pa ti bèl li bèl Mademoiselle is all
dressed up in pink today; she is really beautiful.
roze, woze vt To redden. Roze bouch To apply
rouj to the lips.
rozè a, wozè a n Rosary* (prayer). V chaple.
rozèt la, wozèt la n Bow-tie. Ou ret chita sou
baton rozèt ou You remain listless and indifferent
when you have a duty to act.
rozo a, wozo a n Reed (plant). Ginerium sagit-
tatum.
ruin nan n Ruin(s)*.
ruinen, rinen, winen vt To wreck, to ruin*.
ryen Nothing. (Restricted use). Yo tiye’l pou
ryen They killed him for nothing (for no reason).
V anyen. Ou fè tou sa pou ryen You did all that to
no avail.
S
sa 1
demons pron 1. That. M’pa renmen sa I do not
like that. 2. “Sa” is sometimes used for “that
person, that one”. Sa konprann li konn tout bagay,
li pa konn anyen He thinks he knows everything; he
does not know anything. PAURIS-113: Kote sa ap
mache, tout kò li ap balanse lakadans.
sa 2
vi To be able (the modal auxiliaries “can,
may”). “Sa” is used especially in negative phrases.
M’pa sa ale I cannot go.
sa 3
, sa...a What, that which. Sa ou fè’m nan, m’ap
fè ou li tou What you did to me, I will do to you
also. DEJEAN-44: Sa li deklare a vre What he
stated is true.
sa 4
interrog pron Who?, what?, which? Sa ou di?
What did you say? Sa ou te fè? What did you do?
What had you done?
sa a 1
demons adj sing This, that. Foto sa a This
photo.
sa a 2
demons pron sing This, that, this one, that
one. Sa a pat mouri This one did not die.
sa a yo 1
, sa yo demons adj plur These, those.
Ròb sa a yo These dresses.
sa a yo 2
, sa yo demons pron plur These, those.
M’renmen sa a yo I like these.
sab 1
la n Sand. Sab lanmè ak sab larivyè pa
menm; sab larivyè pa sale, li fè pi bon mòtye Sea
sand and river sand are not the same; river sand is
not salty and makes the better mortar.
sab 2
la n Saber*, sword.
sable vt To sand, to smooth with sand paper.
“Papye sable” ‘Sanded paper’, sandpaper. In the
North (usu) “katapoli”.
sabliye a n Sand-box tree. Hura crepitans L.
sabo a n Type of shoes.
sabò a n A slap with the back of the hand. Cf.
souflèt, pataswèl. Si ou pa fèmen dyòl ou, m’ap
fout ou yon sabò If you do not shut your mouth, I
am going to slap you down.
sabote vt To slap.
sache a n Paper bag, sachet*. Fè yo mete rad yo
nan sache pou yo pa sal Have them put the clothes
in a paper bag, so they won’t be soiled.
sad la n Snapper (fish).
sadin nan n Sardine*.
173 S
saf attrib Gluttonous, glutton, insatiable, greedy.
Cf. aloufa, afre.
safetida V asafetida
safran an n Saffron* (spice).
safrete a, safte a n Gluttony, greed.
safte V safrete
sagou a n Sago*. Arrow root flour made from
the soft interior of the trunk of various palms
and cycads. Used in puddings, cookies, etc.
saj attrib Wise.
sajès la n Wisdom.
sajfam nan, fanmsay n Midwife. Also akouchèz.
sak 1
la n Bag, sack*. V pòch. Sak pay Straw
bag; straw saddlebag. Sak vid pa kanpe An empty
sack can’t stand up. (In other words, one can’t
work on an empty stomach).
sak 2
, sa’k Contracted form of “sa ki”, that which,
what, he who. M’konnen sa’k pral rive I know
what is going to happen.
sakabal la n Leather case usually hung on a
horse’s saddle to carry provisions.
sakad la n Jerk (movement).
sakade vt To jolt.
sakaje vt To mess up; to sack*, to plunder.
sakit la n Small (leather cloth) sack or tiny bag.
Machann chabon an mete kòb la nan sakit li The
charcoal vender put the money in her bag.
sakle V sèkle
sakòch la n Handbag.
sakre attrib Sacred*, holy.
sakreman an n Sacrament*. Extreme unction.
sakrifis la n Sacrifice*.
sakrifye vt To sacrifice*.
sakristen an n Sacristan*, sexton*.
sakristi a n Sacristy*.
saksofòn nan, sakstofòn nan n Saxophone*.
sakzòrye a, sak zorye a n Pillowcase.
sal 1
la n Room, hall. V lasal.
sal 2
vt To soil, to stain.
sal 3
attrib Dirty, filthy. Sal kon dan peny To be
very dirty (like the teeth of a comb).
salad la n Salad*.
salamabit interj Son of a bitch!*
salamanje a, sal a manje a n Dining room.
saldeben an, sal de ben an n Bathroom.
sale 1
vt 1. To salt*. 2. To insult, to let s.o. have
it.
sale 2
Salty*. Salted*. Sale tankou lanmè Jakmèl
Salty as the sea of Jacmel.
salè a n Salary*, wages. Cf. apwentman.
salèz la n Salt(ed)* food (meat, fish).
salezon an n Salt(ed)* meat. Yo prepare bon
salezon nan restoran an They prepare good salt
meat in the restaurant.
sali vt To soil. (rare for) sal.
salin nan n Salt-mine*, salt* works, salt* marsh,
salina*.
salisan attrib Easily soiled.
salmanaza n Monkey business, a flop.
salon an n Living room (house), lounge (hotel).
salòp la n 1. Slovenly, dirty, filthy, vile individual.
2. Immoral, unscrupulous individual. Li kite
nèg la poutèt li salòp She left that man because he
was a filthy and vile individual.
salope vt To soil, to botch.
salòpèt la n 1. Dungaree (overalls usually with
zipper). 2. Loose woman, dirty woman.
salopri a n 1. Base behavior, dirty trick. 2. Scoundrel,
rascal, scamp, trash (person).
salte a n 1. Dirt, filth. 2. A degraded person.
M’wè de fi ki fache nan lari a; yo di kont salte I
saw two angry women in the street; they blurted out
a lot of filthy words.
saltenbank la n Rascal.
salue, salye, salwe vt To greet, to salute*, to
render a salute. Salue Pòl pou mwen Give my
regards to Paul. Salye lasosyete To get married.
samdi a n Saturday. Le samdi On Saturdays.
Samdi dlo benit Holy Saturday. Baron samdi,
Baron lakwa n Vodou god.
san1
an n Blood. Fè move san To rage, to become
irritated, furious; to be upset, to get angry. You
analiz san Blood test. Poze san ou Take it easy.
San’m ale avè’l I like him (or) her, I go for him
(or) her. Jwenn yon moun nan bon san’l To catch
someone in a good humor. Pran san To draw blood;
to take a blood sample. Yo gate san’m They made
me angry. Li sou san’l He is in a good mood. Lèt
pase lan san manman pitit la The nursing mother’s
milk turned sour. Mizik la mache lan san’m The
music enthralls me, it got to me. Nou sue san We
sweat blood. Mete san ou sou ou (or) Pran san ou
Get yourself together. Calm yourself. Take it easy.
Don’t rush. San’m tap manje’m I was boiling over
with anger; I was irritated. Ti boul san Blood-clot.
Gen san cho To be impatient, restless. Ou mèt kriye
san You can cry your eyes out. Jwèt la make san
The way things are going, a tragedy is imminent.
Benyen san To be covered with blood.
S 174
san 2
conj & prep Without. Depi ou san lespri, yo
bafwe ou When you’re a fool, they are always cheating
you. San tèt stupid, with no brains. San blag! No
kidding! No fooling! (Interjection denoting surprise).
San pretansyon Humble, unpretentious.
San senk Broke, penniless. San sa Otherwise.
san3
num One hundred.
sanatoriòm nan n Sanatorium*.
sanba a n 1. The lead singer in a work-bee
(koumbit). 2. Composer of popular songs.
sanblan Fè sanblan To make out, to make believe, to
fake, to feign, to pretend, to act as if.
sanble 1
vi 1. To look like, to take after, to resemble*.
Marasa yo sanble ak papa yo The twins look
like their father. 2. To look alike. Yo sanble
tankou de gout dlo They look like two peas in a pod.
Sanble It seems that.
sanble 2
V rasanble
sandal la n Sandal*. V sapat, karyoka.
sandriye a n Ash tray. Cf. E. cinders*.
sandriyon, chandriyon n Cinderella*. Any raggedy,
shabby person.
sandwich la n Sandwich*.
sanfason, san fason Without ceremony.
sanfwa a n Self control.
sang nan n Cinch-belt, breast-strap to hold the
saddle, girth (harness). Pou you bourik byen sele,
se pou li gen bon sang mare anba vant li For a
donkey to be well saddled he must have a good breaststrap
tied under his belly.
sanginè attrib Bloodthirsty.
sangle vt To gird with a girth (belt).
sangwen an n Filthy, shameless person.
sankoutya attrib Sloven, careless, not particular,
negligent; one who doesn’t give a damn; a rustic
hick; a shameless person.
sanmanman an, san manman an n Good for
nothing, heartless scoundrel; desperado, unscrupulous
person who has nothing to lose.
sann nan n Ash(es), cinders*.
sannanm, san nanm attrib Weak, listless, simple,
apathetic. Msye gen lontan nan peyi a; si’l pat san
nanm, li ta konn debouye’l deja The man has been
in this country a long time; if he weren’t so listless,
he would know how to get around.
sanpwèl V chanprèl
sanront, san ront Shameless.
sans la n Meaning, sense*. Nan sans In the
direction of, towards. Bon sans Good sense.
sansa, san sa Otherwise, were it not for that.
Sante’l pa trò bon; san sa li tap fè you bon sekretè
Her health is not good; were it not for that, she
would be a fine secretary.
sansantiman, san santiman attrib Shameless. Cf
E. sentiment*.
sansasyon an n Sensation*.
sanse Supposed (to). Ou pa sanse fè sa You are
not supposed to do that.
sansi a n Leech, blood sucker.
sansib adj Sensitive*, ticklish; sympathetic, compassionate.
Sansib pou To be very fond of. Li
sansib anpil pou ti boutèy li He cannot get away
from his bottle (booz). Li touche kòd sansib mwen
He struck a chord (tender spot) with me.
sansinik, sans inik One way. Ri sansinik One way
street.
sansipòtan, san sipòtant Pa gen san sipòtan To be
impatient, intolerant.
sant 1
la n Odor, feeling; scent*, smell. V santò,
odè. M’pran you move sant nan kay la Something
smells bad in this house. Sant luil la dekonpoze tout
moun The smell of this oil makes everybody sick.
Pran sant To smell.
sant 2
la n Center, centre*. At Port-au-Prince the
word is used synonymously for “small hospital”,
“dispensary”.
santans la n 1. Legal sentence*. 2. Consequence,
fate.
sante a, lasante n Health. M’ta ale men m’pa gen
lasante I would go there, but my health isn’t too
good. Sante li pa bon, pa kite’l ale He is not well,
don’t let him go. Li an sante He is in good health.
santèn About one hundred.
santi vt To smell; to feel, to perceive. Ban’m
santi’l Let me smell it. M’santi’m pi byen kounyea
I feel much better now. vi To stink, to smell, to
exude an odor. Santi bon To smell good. Santi
move To smell bad, to stink. Dlo a santi The
water is foul. Ti santi pise Kid; small, insignificant
person.
santim nan n Centime*, cent*. (Haitian currency).
santiman an n Sentiment*, feeling.
santimèt la n 1. One-hundredth part of a meter*
(.3937 inch). 2. Measuring tape.
santinèl la n Sentry*.
santò a n Bad smell, stench, stink.
santre vt To center*.
santye a n Path (rare).
sanvègòy, san vègòy attrib Shameless, shameful.
sanzatann Unexpectedly.
175 S
sanzave a n Shameless, scoundrel. Good for
nothing. V vakabon.
sapat la, chapat la n Cheap, rough sandals worn
by peasants or the poor consisting simply of the
sole of the shoe plus a strap. Cf. karyoka,
sandal, soulye.
sapata vt To mistreat, to beat up, to give a blow.
sapatonn nan n A hard blow, a whack.
sapen an n Fir.
sapoti a, sapotiy la n Sapodilla* (a fruit). Sp.
sapodilla. Achras zapota L. (syn) Manilkara
zapotilla (Jacq.).
saranpyon an, charanpyon n Measles.
sasinen V ansasinen
satan an n Satan*. V demon, dyab.
saten an n Satin*.
satisfaksyon an n Satisfaction*. Mande sa-tisfaksyon
To request a favor. Bay satisfaksyon To render a
favor, to grant someone’s wish. Ki bay satisfaksyon
To be satisfactory.
satisfè vt To satisfy*. Ki pa satisfè Unsatisfied.
satouyèt V chatouyèt
savan an n Learned person, savant*.
savann nan n Prairie, meadow, field, savanna*.
Savann Dezole Area near Gonaives. Pè savann
Bush priest.
save attrib (pop) Enlightened, one who is cultured
and educated. Se moun ki save This man is
educated.
savon an n Soap. V savonèt. Kim savon Lather.
Savon lesiv (or) savon lave Detergent.
savonèt la n 1. (pop) Toilet soap. 2. Bwa
savonèt A plant which is used to wash when
there is no soap. In the Artibonite, it is called
‘lyann savon’. Frote (lyann savon) bwa savonèt
pou lave rad yo Rub the clothes with the ‘soap’
plant to wash them.
savonnay la n Admonition, verbal abuse, insults.
savonnen vt 1. To soap. Savonnen tout kò ou depi
nan tèt jis nan pye ou Soap your body from head to
foot. 2. (fig) To insult vociferously, to bawl out,
to reprimand.
savwa a n Knowledge.
sayibòd la n Sideboard*, Cupboard.
se 1
vi Form of the verb “to be”. Mostly used
when predicate is a noun or pronoun. Li se
doktè He is a physician.
se 2
Li pa be, li pa se He didn’t say a word.
se 3
Used impersonally as an introductory word,
“se” is not accompanied by a subject. Besides,
it precedes the negative adverb ‘pa’. Se It is; Se
te It was; Se va It will be; Se ta (va) It would be.
Se you bon bagay It is a good thing. “Se yon” is
sometimes contracted to “s’on”. Se pou It is
necessary that (to have to...). Se pa pou ... It is
forbidden to ... Se pa pou moun gen tròp ògèy One
shouldn’t be too haughty.
sè 1
a, sò a n 1. Sister*. V sese. Gran sè Any
older sister. M’pral wè si sò Mari kapab fè’l pou
mwen I’m going to see if sister Mary can make it
for me. M’regrèt sa pou ou, sò’m I’m sorry for you,
sister. 2. Nun, sister*.
sè 2
‘These’. Sè jou si These days. Sè dam yo
These ladies. “Sè” and ‘sè...si’ are only used in
set phrases.
sè ke The fact is that... (widely used).
sèch V sèk
seche, cheche vt To dry. Maladi’l la seche’l His
illness has emaciated him, has made him become a
skeleton.
sechrès la, chechrès n Drought, dry spell. Ane
sa a gen sechrès; rekòlt gate This year there was a
drought, and the harvest was lost.
sèd la, sèd espayol n Spanish-cedar. Cedrela
odorata L.
sede vi To yield, to give in, to give way. vt To
let someone have something for a price, although
it is not officially for sale. M’konnen lanp la pa
pou vann; men èske ou vle sede’m li? I know the
lamp is not for sale; but will you let me have it for a
price?
sedui, sedi vt To charm, seduce*, allure.
sefwe, sefre vi To go away.
segon Second*, 2nd (Rare). V dezyèm.
segondè attrib Secondary* (school).
segonn nan n 1. A second * (measure of time).
2. A medium size drum (in a group). 3. Eleventh
grade, third year of highschool in the American
system.
segretè V sekretè
sèjan an n Sergeant*.
sejou a n Sojourn*.
sèjousi, sè jou si These days.
sèk 1
, sèch, chèch attrib 1. Dry. 2. Skinny. 3. Empty
(pocket). Examples and expressions: Pòch mwen
sèch, m’pa gen kòb My pockets are empty; I have no
money. Li chèch kou bwa bale He’s skinny as a
broom stick. Kase sèk, pete sèk To snap off, to
break off with a snap. Malè sèk Sudden, unexpected
misfortune. Nan sèk (or) Nan tan sèk In the dry
season. When it’s not raining... as opposed to
‘nan tan lapli’. Gen je chèch To have a (hell of)
nerve, to be unashamed. Rad yo sèch; antre yo The
clothes are dry; bring them in.
S 176
sèk 2
la n 1. Circle*; ring. Evite sèk li Avoid his
company. 2. Hoop. L’ap roule sèk He is pushing
the hoop.
sekatè a n Shears (two shears).
sèke V sèkle
sèkèy la n Coffin, casket.
sekifè Consequently; and so.
sekile V sikile
sekirite a n Security*.
sèkle 1
, sakle vt To weed; to cut with a sickle or
machete. Sèkle ak rou To hoe. Lakou a merite
sèkle The yard should be weeded.
sèkle 2
, sèke vt To encircle*, to head off. Yo
sèkle énmi an, epi yo mache pran’l They encircled
the enemy and closed in on him.
sekou a, soukou a n Help, relief. O sekou!
Help! Au secours*. V anmwe.
sekoup V soukoup
sekouri, sekoure vt To help.
sekous la, soukous n 1. Shaking, tremor. 2. Reaction,
action. M’a fè ou konnen sekous mwen I
will let you know who I am and what I can do.
sekrè a, segre n Secret*. Sekrè a deyò The secret
is out. An sekrè Secretly.
sekretè a, segretè a n Secretary*; personal helper.
M’bezwen you sekretè pou lave machin nan pou mwen
I need a helper to wash my car. Elèv yo fòme you
asosyasyon; yo mete’m sekretè The students formed
a club; they chose me as secretary.
seksyon an n Section*, division. Chèf seksyon an
Sherif of a small rural district.
sektanm V septanm
sekwa attrib Pretentious.
sekwe V souke
sèl 1
la, disèl n Salt*; salts* (laxative). Sèl depsonn
Epsom’s salts. Gro sèl Non-refined, rough salt.
Sèl fen Powdered salt. Aran sèl Salt(ed) herring.
Trou sèl Salt marsh.
sèl 2
attrib Lonely, lonesome, alone; only; exceptional,
violent, particular. Gen you sèl lapli ki
tonbe yè swa There was such a rainfall last night.
Tou sèl Only. Se limenm tou sèl li konnen He is
very selfish; he only knows himself. M’t’al vizite
teren an; nan pwen tè, se ròch tou sèl I went to visit
the land; there is no dirt, it is only rocks.
sèl 3
la n Saddle. Bay kout sèl To scheme, to get
money from someone by giving him a hard luck story.
sela V sesi sela
sele 1
Poze sele To seal* (the door of a building
by a court order).
sele 2
vt To saddle (a horse). Sele bride Fully
harnessed. The word “sele” is also used when a
spirit mounts (comes up) a person who then is
supposed to be his horse. That spirit is the
“loa”. Lwa Ogoun sele fi a Ogoun has “mounted”
the woman. N.B. When the spirit has gone
away, they say Li desele.
sele 3
vt To talk someone into giving or lending
you money with a hard luck story.
selebre vt To celebrate*.
selebride a n A cheap beverage used by the
poor.
selera a n Villain, rogue, scoundrel.
seleri a n Celery*.
selibatè a n Bachelor (m), spinster (f).
selina a n Elderly woman. Cradle snatcher, an
older woman who prefers very young men.
selino a n Old man.
sèlman adv Only, merely, but; nevertheless.
selon prep Depending on, according to. Se selon
It depends. M’ap fè tou sa ou mande’m pou’m fè
pou ou, cheri, se selon jan ou mennen tèt ou I will
do whatever you ask me to do for you, darling, it
depends on how you act.
sèman an n Oath. Fè sèman To swear.
semans la n Seeds for planting.
sèmante vi 1. To swear, to curse. 2. To swear
(to state under oath).
semèl la, senmèl n Sole (of a shoe). Doub semèl
Double soles.
semèn nan, senmenn n Week. Semèn pase Last
week. Semèn sent Passion week, Holy week.
sen 1
an n Breast. V tete.
sen 2
an, sent la n Holy, Saint. “Sent” is used
only in phrases such as (la) Sent Vyèj. Sen Jozèf
Saint* Joseph*. Timoun sa a gen you sen pouse dèyè’l
That child is acting compulsively and naughtily and
irresponsibly, as if moved by an evil spirit.
sen 3
attrib Healthy.
sene sòf, sennesòf Safe (and sound).
sèn 1
nan, senn n Scene*, stage.
sèn 2
nan, senn nan n Fish-net, seine*, triangular
drag-net. Pechè a voye sèn li, li pran anpil pwason
The fisherman spread his fishing-net; he caught a
lot of fish.
sena a n Senate*.
senatè a n Senator*.
senbòl la n Symbol*.
sendenden an n Worthless, insignificant person.
177 S
sendik la n The employee who has the responsibility
for turning the irrigation system off and
on.
sendika a n Labor union.
Sendomeng, Sendonmeng n 1. Former name of
Haiti (until 1804). 2. The Dominican Republic.
sene a n Senna* (medicinal plant).
sènen, sène vt To encircle, to hem in.
senèryen An senèryen Too casually. Ou ap aji an
senèryen You are acting too casually.
senjòj la n 1. A millipede. 2. An invocation to
Saint George* when one sees a millipede; or
makes a simple request for aid. V amilpye.
senk num Five. San senk Penniless, broke. M’te
kon you grenn senk I was all by myself, lonely.
senkant num Fifty.
senkyèm num Fifth.
senmafò a n 1. A tall pole. 2. A tall, thin person.
senmenn V semèn
senn V sèn
sennen V To cast nets, to set traps for fish.
senp 1
la n Formula, incantation, ritual with
prayers which is supposed to effect an immediate
cure. Ban’m fè you senp pou ou pou ou pa gen tèt
fè mal ankò Let me give you a simple remedy (formula)
so you won’t have a headache anymore.
senp 2
attrib 1. Simple*, mere. 2. Modest, unassuming,
not complicated.
senpati a n Liking, feeling, congeniality, fellow-
feeling.
senpatik attrib Likeable, pleasant, lovable, congenial,
friendly. Li lèd, men li senpatik He’s ugly
but has a pleasant personality.
senpatize avèk vi To feel for, to sympathize*
with.
senpleman, senpman adv Simply*, only.
sensè attrib Sincere*.
sensèman adv Sincerely*, truly. M’di ou sa sensèman
I am telling you sincerely.
sent V sen
sentespri a n Holy Spirit*.
sentetyèn nan n Type of knife, originally from
Saint Etienne, France.
senti a n 1. Belt. 2. Middle, waist. Manman,
m’gen you doulè lan senti; se pa ti kras fè mal
Mommie, I have a pain in my side; it really hurts.
Li mete de men’l nan senti’l pou’l moute mòn nan
She puts her two hands on her waist while climbing
the hill. Mare senti ou Make sacrifices. Be ready
to suffer. An plèn senti Pregnant.
sentiron an n Belt (man’s). Sentiron pa vann chè
Belts aren’t expensive. Si ou fè dezòd, m’ap fout ou
senk kout sentiron If you don’t behave, I’ll belt you
five times.
sentoma a, sen toma n Incredulous person,
doubting Thomas*.
sentre vt 1. To fit tight, to tighten, surround.
2. To harass (grill) someone with endless questioning;
to corner, to put the heat on, to catch.
V fouye, sere.
sentrebas, sentre bas To keep after (s.o.), to
corner.
senyen vi To bleed. vt To draw blood, to
bleed.
sèp la n Wooden triangular collar placed around
an animal’s neck which prevents it from getting
out of an enclosure. (syn) kròk.
sèpan an n Serpent*.
sepandan conj However, yet, nevertheless.
sèpantye a, chapantye a n Woodpecker.
separasyon an n Separation*.
separe vi To part, to divide, share, to dish out
(food), distribute, separate*. Separe cheve ou
Part your hair. vi To get separated. Mwen ak
madanm mwen nou pa sa viv ansanm, n’ap separe
My wife and I can’t live together; we just have to
have a separation.
sèpèt la n Sickle. Also kouto digo.
sèpida a n Bad character (fem).
septanm, sektanm n September*.
seramik la n Ceramics*.
sera seta V seta sera
sere 1
attrib Tight, close-fitting, close-fisted, constipated.
(Adv) tightly.
sere 2
vt 1. To tighten (a screw, etc.), to clench
(teeth). 2. To hide, to conceal, to secrete, to
lock up. 3. To economize, to save, to lay away,
to put away. 4. To corner (s.o.) with questions.
To pump s.o. Examples and expressions: Yo
sere kòf la anba tè They hid the strong box in the
ground. M’gen kè sere I have a heavy heart; I’m
troubled; I am apprehensive. Gòj mwen te sere I
had a lump in my throat. Li sere He is constipated.
Sere boulon V boulon.
seremoni an n Ceremony*. Also Vodou term.
Seremoni maji, seremoni pwen. (COURLANDER).
seren an n Evening dew, evening mist. Piga
seren Type of poison.
serenad la n Serenade*.
sereng nan n Syringe*.
seri 1
a n Lock. Trou seri a Keyhole.
seri 2
a n Series*, group.
S 178
seriz la n Cherry*.
serye attrib Serious*, solemn, trustworthy, earnest,
reliable. Also seryèz (applied to females). (Adv)
In earnest.
seryezman adv Seriously*, in earnest.
sese n Sister; aunt. Generally Ti sese Sis. Often
an apocope for any girl’s name beginning with
Se. Sesilia, Selina, Seramiz, etc. Bonjou sese
Good morning, sis. M’pral ka sese Roz I’m going
to aunt (sister) Rose’s.
sesi sela This and that.
sèso a n Clothes hanger.
sèt num Seven.
sètadi i.e., That is to say.
seta sera, sera seta That’s enough. Finish. That’s
the last word. Never more.
sèten 1
attrib Certain*; sure. M’sèten m’ap reyisi;
se yon bagay sèten I know I’ll succeed; it’s a sure
thing.
sèten 2
indef adj Some, certain*. Gen sèten moun
ki pa janm rete lakay yo There are some people who
never stay home.
sètènman adv Certainly*.
sètifika a n 1. Certificate*. 2. Sixth grade (last
year of primary school in Haiti). 3. Diploma
certifying completion of primary school.
sètifye vi To certify*.
sètitid la n Certainty*, certitude*.
sètoblije To be obliged to, to have to.
setrouve, setouve It (so) happened that.
setyèm num Seventh.
sèvant la n Maid. Usually bòn.
sevè attrib Severe*, strict.
sèvèl la n Brain (animal); intelligence. V sèvo.
Li san sèvèl He has no brains. Jodi a m’ta manje
you sèvèl bèf byen kuit Today I’d like to eat some
well cooked beef brains. Li te etidye tròp; kòm sèvèl
li te fèb, li vin fou He studied too much; since he
had a weak brain, he went crazy.
sèvi vt 1. To serve*. 2. To worship. vi Sèvi ak
(avèk) To deal with, to associate with, to make use
of. Examples and expressions: Sèvi pou To
serve (to be of use). Èske ou sèvi ak mo sa a an
kreyòl? Do you use that word in Creole? Sèvi
temwen To witness, to serve as a witness. Sè jou
si, direktè a pa sèvi ak sekretè’l la; li fè tout bagay
pou kò’l These days the director doesn’t make any
use of his secretary. He does everything by himself.
M’pa sèvi ak moun konsa I don’t deal with that
kind of people.
sèvis 1
la n Service*, favor. 2. Duty, service*. De
sèvis, sou sèvis On duty. 3. Protestant ecclesiastical
service*. 4. Vodou ceremony.
sèvis 2
la n A group of tin containers which fit
into each other when empty (in order to conserve
space) and used to carry various foods. Extensively
used in Haiti.
sèvitè a n Servant*.
sèvo a n Brain. V sèvèl. Papa’m te you nonm ki
te gen sèvo My father was a very smart man. Pa fè
sèvo ak mwen Don’t try to act smart with me. M’fè
you kout sèvo I used my ingenuity (in a flash of
genius). Nèg sa ou wè la a se you sèvo, li konn
pale tout lang That man you see there is a brain; he
can speak any language.
sèvolan an n 1. Paper kite (for flying). V kap,
grandou. Sèvolan pa’m nan moute pi ro My kite
flew higher. 2. Also stag-beetle
sevre vt To wean. To sever. Manman li sevre’l
bonè Her mother weaned her very early.
sèvyab attrib Obliging, helpful.
sèvyèt la n Towel. Sèvyèt tab (table) Napkin.
“Tablecloth” is usually “nap”.
seyans la n Performance (theater, movies). Session,
séance* (of a committee, of an organization,
etc.).
seye V eseye
Seyè a, Leseyè n Lord.
sèz num Sixteen. Ou touche nan travay ou chak sèz
You get paid at your job every sixteenth of the month.
sezaryèn nan n Caesarian*, C-section. Yo fè’l
sezaryèn She underwent a caesarian operation.
sezi 1
vt To seize*.
sezi 2
attrib To be astonished, startled, taken by
or to jump from surprise. Lè li konnen mari’l
mouri nan aksidan, li sezi jis li endispoze When she
heard about her husband’s death in an accident, she
was so startled, she fainted. Fè (yon moun) sezi To
startle (s.o.). M’sezi wè ou jodi a I am surprised to
see you today.
sezisman an n Astonishment, shock. Sezisman
lanmò mari’l nan aksidan fè li pa janm pale The
shock from her husband’s death in an accident caused
her to lose her speech.
sezon an n Season*.
sezonnen V asezonnen
Shada n Société haitiano-americaine de développement
agricole. In the forties, an American
company that had rubber plantations in Haiti.
si 1
a n Saw.
si 2
attrib Sure*; confident, reliable.
si 3
attrib Sour*. Si kon sitron Sour as a lemon.
179 S
si 4
conj If; whether. Si se pat pou... Were it not
for...
si 5
adv So, so much. SYLVAIN-150: Timoun
mwen yo mwen si renmen My children (whom) I
love so much.
sianka V anka
sibi vt To undergo, to suffer, to experience.
sibit attrib Sudden. Li mouri mò sibit, tout moun
sezi He died a sudden death to everyone’s surprise.
sibitman adv Suddenly.
sibreka a, soubreka n Second in charge on a
ship.
sid 1
la n South*. Nan sid In the South. Moun sid
Southerner. Moun nan sid, langaj yo pa menm ak
pa moun nan nò The speech of the people in the
South is not the same as that of those in the North.
Sid ès Southeast. Sid wès Southwest.
sid 2
la n Cider*.
sidorye a n Pillow case. (Rare). V tèdoreye.
sife, sifè Indeed, yes, truly, in fact, it’s true. Sife,
li pa manti No, he’s not lying.
sifi vi To suffice*, to be enough, sufficient*.
sifilis la n Syphilis*.
sifle V soufle
siflèt V souflèt
sifoke, sivoke vi To suffocate*, to gasp for air, to
choke.
siga a n Cigar*.
sigal V lasigal
sigalye a n (Rare) Cigar* maker.
sigarèt la n 1. Cigarette*. 2. Spool (of thread).
sige vi To go away. Cf. Spanish ‘sigue’.
sigjere, sijere vt To suggest*.
sigjesyon an, sijestyon an n Suggestion*.
sije a n Subject*. Frè’l la se move sije His brother
is a bad character.
sijte vi To overcast (in sewing).
sik 1
la n Circus*.
sik 2
la n Sugar*. Sik rouj Brown sugar. Jan fè
sik John is diabetic.
sikdòy la n Type of candy.
sikilasyon an n Traffic (street).
sikile, sekile vi To get about (news, person).
To keep moving, to move on, to circulate*. Jandam
nan di foul la: Sikile The policeman said to
the crowd: Get going. Doktè a di jenòm nan: Se
pou ou sikile (al nan fi) The doctor said to the
young man: You got to put yourself in circulation
(go find some girls).
siklis la n Pedal-pusher, cyclist*.
siklòn nan n Hurricane, storm, cyclone*.
sikonsi vt To circumcise*.
sikonsizyon an n Circumcision*.
sikonstans la n Special circumstance*, situation.
Se sikonstans ki fè’l arive fè sa It’s life that brought
him to this point, (that made him do that).
sikre vt To sweeten.
siksè a n Success*.
sikui a n Circuit*.
sikyatri a n Psychiatry*.
sila 1
, sila a demons adj This, that. Istwa sila
That story.
sila 2
, sila a demons pron This, that; this one, that
one. He (who). Sila a yo These, those. Sila ki
He, who.
silabè a n Reading primer. Cf. E. Syllabary*.
silans la n Silence*, quiet. Silans! (interj) Quiet!
silema V sinema
silvouplè, sivouplè If you please, please. V souple.
simagri a, simagre a n Grimace, gesture, affection;
an affected demonstration. Pouki sa ou ap fè tout
simagri sa yo devan glas la? Why are you making
all those faces at the mirror? Cf. makakri.
siman 1
an n Cement*.
siman 2
adv Surely*.
simante vt To cement*.
simaye vt To scatter.
Simbi n Water spirit. Simbi nan dlo, kote ou ye?
O spirit of the water, where are you?
simen vt To sow; to scatter, to strew. Simen sab
sou rout la To strew sand on the road. Simen
baton To shower with blows, with a stick. Simen
pitit To sow wild oats. To have children here and
there.
simenkontra a n Wormseed (Chenopodium am-
brosioides).
simidò a n The singing leader of a koumbit
(COURLANDER).
simityè a, simikyè, semityè, simtyè n Cemetery*.
Graveyard, burial-ground.
simwa a n Poinsettia. (For six months of the
year this plant bears bright blooms, and for the
remaining six months it has shiny green leaves).
sinakwa V siydekwa
S 180
sinema a, silema a n Cinema*, movie house.
“Movies” is usually “film”, “fim”. Sa se sinema
That’s not real. It’s hypocrisy, pretense, make-believe.
Se sinema gratis It’s a free show! It’s a laugh.
sinik attrib Cynical*.
sinis la n Gray rooster. < Sp.
sinistre a n Disaster victim. Lèt sinistre Milk sent
to disaster victims.
sinon conj Otherwise.
sioka V sizoka
sipèb attrib Superb*, haughty.
siperyè attrib Excellent, very good; of superior*
quality. Comparative is “pi siperyè” Better, finer,
best, superior. M’achte de soulye ki siperyè I bought
some excellent shoes.
sipèstisyon an n Superstition*.
sipèvizè a n Supervisor*.
siplis la n Torment, torture.
sipliye, soupriye vt To beg, entreat, insist. Not
for ‘beg pardon’ = mande padon.
sipò a n 1. Prop, pole. 2. Support*. Sipò moral
Moral support.
sipòtan attrib Gen san sipòtan To bear up with, to
be tolerant.
sipòte vt To endure, to stand, to support*, to
uphold.
sipoze 1
vt To suppose*; to assume, to surmise.
sipoze 2
1. Supposed* to. 2. Supposing that, just
suppose that.
sipozisyon an n Supposition*.
sipozon Let’s suppose*.
siprann, souprann vt To surprise*. To take by
surprise*; to catch in the act. V bare, sezi.
M’siprann tigason an ap fimen I caught the boy
smoking. San’m pa atann, li ban’m yon kou siprann
When I least expected it, he dealt me a surprise
blow.
siprime vt To have an adverse effect on one’s
growth (particularly during puberty). Not to
have one’s (monthly) period. Yo di yon jènfi va
siprime si’l manje tròp sitron They say that a girl
will stop menstruating, if she makes too great a use
of lemons.
sipriz la n Surprise*.
siray la n Shoe-polish.
sire vt To shine, to wax. Sire soulye a Shine the
shoe. Tèt li byen sire, ou a di se you glas His hair
is so shiny, it looks like a mirror. Pantalon an trò
sire, lave’l These pants are too dirty, wash them.
sirèn nan n Siren* (horn).
sirèt 1
la n Sugar candy. Ti machann sirèt Candy
peddler. Metye’l se fè sirèt He’s a confectioner.
sirèt 2
attrib Sourish*. Dan’m vin sirèt My teeth
are sensitive to the wind; they are sourish, on edge.
siri a n Saw-mill*, lumber mill.
sirik la n 1. Water crab. 2. (fig) Stingy, tightwad.
siro a n Syrup*. V kann, myèl. Gen plizyè kalite
siro: siro kann, siro myèl, siro bètrav, etc. There
are several kinds of syrup: sugar cane, honey syrup,
beet syrup, etc. Siro myèl Honey. Bay siro To
turn the rope slowly in jump rope.
sirolin Syrupy; silky; sweet, velvety, smooth.
sirote, siwote vt To savor, to absorb, to drink
slowly (with pleasure).
sirwa a, siwa a n Southwest* wind. Cf. nòde,
nòrwa.
sirwèl la, siwèl la n Purple monbin, Spanish
plum. Spondias purpurea L.
siryen an n Syrian*, Arab merchant.
sis 1
num Six*. When followed by a vowel sound:
siz as in sizan, sizòm, sizè.
sis 2
Ou pap sis You won’t succeed.
siseptib attrib Touchy, easily offended.
sispann vt & vi To quit; to suspend*, cease,
stop, discontinue.
sispèk 1
attrib Suspicious*, suspect*, guilty-looking.
sispèk 2
vt To suspect*.
sispekte V To suspect*, to be suspicious* of.
sistèm nan n 1. System*. 2. Habit.
sistre attrib Cheater, parasite. Moun sistre People
who live at the expense of others.
sitadèl la n Citadel*.
sitan, si tan adv So much. Sitantè As a matter of
fact.
sitasyon an n Court citation*, legal summons.
site 1
a n Safety, security*. Cf. Surety*.
site 2
a n Housing project.
site 3
vt 1. To summon (in court). 2. To cite*, to
quote, to mention. Site yon non To mention a
name.
sitèlman, si tèlman adv So, so much. Li sitèlman
manje He eats so much.
sitèn nan n Cistern*, water tank.
sitiran attrib Tolerant, complacent.
sitirans la n (Excessive) Tolerance, complacency.
sitire vt To condone, to tolerate.
181 S
sitirè a n One who condones, forgives too often,
or is overtolerant.
sitirèz la n Same as ‘sitirè’ but applied only to
women.
sitiyasyon an, sityasyon, sitirasyon n Situation*.
sito conj As soon as.
sitou adv Especially, mostly. M’renmen frui anpil,
sitou mango ak pòm I like fruit a lot, especially
mangoes and apples.
sitron an n Lime, Lemon. Citrus aurantifolia
(L.) Swingle. Ti sitron Shorty, a man of short
stature.
sitronad la, sitronnad n Lemonade.
sitronèl la, sitronnèl la n Citronella*.
sitrouy la n Type of vegetable similar to a pumpkin,
gourd.
sitwayen an, sitoyen an n Citizen*.
sitwe a n Southwester* (wind).
siv la n Chives*, Welsh onion. Allium schoenoprasum
L.
siveyan an n Watchman, overseer, foreman; monitor
(school).
siveyans la n Surveillance*.
siveye, souveye vt To watch (over); to oversee;
to spy on.
sivil 1
la n Civilian*.
sivil 2
attrib Civil*, civilian*. V ak 3.
Maryaj sivil
Civil ceremony (wedding). Marye sivil To wed
(civil ceremony only).
sivilizasyon an n Civilization*.
sivoke V sifoke
sivyè a n Stretcher. V branka.
siwa n Southwest*.
siy nan n 1. Sign*. 2. Signal, nod. 3. Omen.
4. Birthmark. Fè you siy To signal, to nod, to
wink, to make a sign, to beckon.
siyad la n A light contact, brushing against.
siyal la n Signal*.
siyale vt To signal*, to mention.
siyalman an n Description (e.g. of a presumed
murderer).
siyati a n 1. Signature*. 2. (pop) Surname, family
name. Li poze siyati He signed. Mete siyati ou
anba papye a anvan ou voye’l ale Sign at the bottom
of the document before you forward it.
siyay la n The wake of. Fann lan siyay yon moun
To go after s.o., to pursue, to follow in the traces of
(s.o.).
siydekwa a, siydelakwa, sinakwa n Sign of the
cross*. (syn) Onondipè.
siye 1
, suiye, souye vt To wipe, to dust. Pote
sèvyèt pou’n siye bouch nou Bring us (some) napkins
to wipe our lips. Siye pye A little dance (an
unassuming party). M’pral nan yon ti siye pye I’m
going to a little dance (party). Siye bèk ou atè!
Forget about it! (said to a person to convey the
idea that because of his misbehavior he will
never be allowed the same privilege again).
siye 2
vt To saw. Siyè yo siye pyebwa a pou yo fè
bèl planch The sawyers sawed the tree to make
beautiful boards.
siye 3
(ak), siyen ak vi To associate with. M’pa
siye ak moun konsa I don’t associate with people
such as these.
siyè a n Sawyer (woodcutter).
siyekole a n Humdinger.
siyen vt To sign*. Li konn yon sèl bagay, siyen
non’l ase He barely knows one thing: how to sign
his name. Kouman ou siyen? What’s your family
name? (pop).
siyifi vi To mean, to signify*.
siyon an n Signal*, sign*. Fè yon siyon To
signal*, to make a sign (to beckon).
siyonnen v To follow in the wake of.
siz V sis
sizo a n 1. Chisel*. 2. Scissors*. 3. Type of
insect. 4. Magnificent frigate bird (Fregata magnificens).
V fregat.
sizoka, sioka, sianka conj (Pop) Whether, if, in
the event that, in case* that; just in case*. V anka.
sizyèm num Sixth*.
skandal la, eskandal n Scandal*, uproar. Fè
skandal To make a scene.
skandalize, eskandalize vt To scandalize*.
skelèt la, eskelèt n Skeleton*.
skiltè a n Sculptor*.
skilti a n Sculpture*.
skòpyon an, eskòpyon n Scorpion*.
skout la, eskout n (Boy) Scout*.
skrin nan n Screen*.
so 1
a n Fall (drop); jump, leap. M’pran you so
I fell off (a horse, etc.). Fè you so rive (or) Fè yon
kout pye rive... To go somewhere (or) To take a
run over... Bay yon so kabrit (in a fight) To pull
and drop s.o. flat on his face.
so a 2
n Pail, bucket.
so a 3
n Seal*; postmark. Mete so To seal, to
attach a legal seal.
S 182
sò 1
a n Fate, lot. Moun pa janm kontan sò yo
People are never satisfied with their fate.
sò 2
Miss (Usually, used before a name). Sò
Mari Miss Mary.
sò 3
V sè
sobtyè a, soptyè n Wooden ice-cream maker,
ice-cream freezer.
sodo a n Waterfall, cascade. There is a place in
central Haiti called ‘Sodo’ (Saut d’eau) that has
a beautiful waterfall, where thousands and thousands
of people go annually seeking miraculous
cures.
sòf 1
prep Save*, except. Cf. eksepte. Nou travay
chak jou sòf dimanch We work everyday except
Sunday.
sòf 2
si conj Unless.
sofa a n Sofa*.
sòkèt la n Socket*.
sòl la n Sole* (a fish).
solay la n Foundation; (raised) floor.
sòlda a n 1. Soldier*. 2. Tiny mollusk called in
E. the ‘hermit crab’.
solèy la, sole a n Sun, sunshine. Jouk sole te
kouche Til sunset. Solèy boule’l He got a sunburn.
solid attrib Sturdy, solid*, firm, substantial, strong.
Gason sa a se yon pent solid That man is a fine
painter.
solisyon an n Solution*.
soloba a n Snack, bite, breakfast.
sòm nan 1
n Psalm*.
sòm nan 2
n Sum*.
somèy la, sonmèy n Sleep. Gro somèy Deep
sleep. M’te pran yon ti somèy midi I took a little
afternoon nap. Li te ant somèy e revèy He was still
half asleep.
somon an n Salmon*.
somye a n Bed spring, box string. M’gen matla
men m’pa gen somye: fò’m achte youn I have a
mattress, but I don’t have a spring; I have to buy
one.
son an 1
n Sound*, noise.
son an 2
n Sawdust. Li fè you zorye ak son He
made a pillow out of the sawdust.
s’on It’s; is a (se yon). S’on bon egzanp It’s a
good example.
sonde vt 1. To test, to check; to probe, to sound*.
2. To test s.o. with the stethoscope.
sonèt la, sonnèt la n Small hand-bell, dinner
bell, doorbell.
sonj la n Dream. M’wè ou nan sonj I dreamed
about you.
sonje, chonje vi To recollect, to remember; to
think of. M’pa sonje ki paj I can’t remember what
page. Fè’m sonje pou m’ale Remind me to go. vt
1. To remember. N’ap sonje ou anpil We’ll miss
you. Ou pa sonje’m You forgot all about me.
sonm, somb attrib Dull, sombre*, sad, dark.
sonmèy V somèy
sonn nan, sond lan n Stethoscope, sounding*
instrument.
sonnen vt & vi To ring; to sound*.
soptyè V sobtyè
sore a, sowe a n Bum, good for nothing.
sorosi a, asorosi, sosi a n Bitter medicinal plant
used to make infusions for stomach aches, fever.
Momordica charantea L.
sòs la n Gravy, sauce*, juice. Sòs pwa Bean soup
with the beans removed. Pwa an sòs Bean soup
(with the beans in it). Sòs tomat Catsup. Sòs pike
Hot sauce. Sòs mango Mango juice. Ou lan tout
sòs You meddle into everything.
sosi V sorosi
sosis la n 1. Sausage*. 2. Poison for dogs.
sosison an n Large sausage*.
sòsye a, chòchye, choche n Witch, sorceress*;
wizard, sorcerer*. V bòkò.
sosyete a, lasosyete n 1. Society*. Mesye dam
lasosyete, bonswa Ladies and Gentlemen (and people)
everybody, good evening. 2. Combine, group, com-
pany.
sòt 1
, sot V sòti
sòt 2
attrib Dummy, foolish, dumb, stupid, illiterate,
silly. Pa fè sòt avè’m Don’t get funny with
me. Moun sòt di sa li konnen; moun lespri konnen
sa’l di Stupid people say what they know; smart
people know what they’re saying. Sòt tankou panyen
pèse Stupid as a jack-ass.
sote 1
vi To jump (over). Ou mèt sote ponpe!
Nothing doing! vt 1. To skip. Manje sote To eat
at irregular intervals. 2. To fry, to saute*. 3. To
blast. Sote tèt To behead. Yo sote pon an They
blasted the bridge. 4. To jump. Sote kòd To jump
rope.
sote 2
To be startled, surprised. Fè you moun sote
To startle s.o.
sòti 1
, soti, sòt, sot vi 1. To go out, to get out, to
step out. 2. To come from. 3. To become, to
come out as. 4. To have just (in this case ‘sòti’
is used as an auxiliary). Examples and expressions:
Nou sot manje We just ate. Ou sòti sove’m
You just saved my life. Ou pa sa fè san soti nan
ròch You can’t get blood out of a turnip. Soti...al
From...to...(From one place to another). Soti
183 S
deyò To get out (news). Soti...rive From..to (place,
time, etc.). (The forms ‘sot’ et ‘sòt’ cannot be
used at the end of a sentence).
sòti 2
, soti Stroll, outing. M’ap fè yon soti I am
going out for a while.
sotiz la n Foolish act, foolishness, silliness, blun-
der.
sou 1
prep On, over, above, up; in the presence
of; over and over; interested in. Examples and
phrases: Mete vè a sou tab la Put the glass on the
table. Li frape sou frape; m’pa louvè He knocked
over and again, but I didn’t open. Yo atake sou
atake men yo pa reyisi They kept on attacking, but
they were unsuccessful. Zanmi’m di’m: M’sou ou
lan you moman My friend said to me: I’ll be with
you in a jiffy (in a moment). M’te vle al nan
sinema ak sè’m. Li refize, li pat sou sa I wanted to
go to the movies with my sister. She refused, she
wasn’t in the mood. She didn’t feel like it. Fi a pa
sou bò ou The girl is not interested in you. Sou
presidan Salomon Under (during the reign of) President
Salomon. Sou kont Under the responsibility
of, in the care of. Sou kote On the side, illicit. Li
gen you fanm sou kote He has a woman on the side.
sou 2
attrib Intoxicated, hobbling, drunk. Sou
kon pipirit Drunk as a kite. M’a sou byen sou I’m
going to be dead drunk. Li pa sou He is sober. Yo
pran pou yo sou They really got it; they were really
worked over.
soubreka V sibreka
souch la, chouch n Stump, root; socket; stub.
Souch bwa Stump. Rache souch To dig up stumps.
Souch dan The visible remains of a broken tooth,
root. Pwa souch (or) pwa chouch Butter bean(s).
souche attrib (Well)-rooted, established, founded.
Byen souche Well protected, well established, (or a
person) having good connections.
soud 1
la n A lizard, larger than the zandolit but
smaller than the mabouya. Soud solèy, soud loray,
etc.
soud 2
attrib Deaf. Soud bèbè Deaf-mute.
soude vt To solder*, weld.
soudè 1
a n A deaf person.
soudè 2
a n Welder, solderer*.
soudi a n Welding.
soudin nan n A mute, sordino*. V ansoudin.
souf 1
la n Breath, puff; blowing. Pran souf To
take a breather. Lè m’pral Sitadèl, anvan m’rive
m’toujou pèdi souf nan mòn nan When I go to the
Citadelle, before arriving I’m always out of breath on
the mountain. Rann san souf To harass.
souf 2
la n Sulphur*.
souflantchou a n Lackey, flatterer, boot-licker
(servile).
soufle 1
, sifle vi 1. To whistle. 2. To blow (the
wind). Van soufle, bwa tonbe The wind blows, the
trees fall. 3. To breathe, to pause, to rest. Kite’m
soufle Let me rest (breathe). M’pa vin soufle lan
banbou I didn’t come here for nothing.
soufle 2
vt To blow; to whisper (information).
Yo pa soufle’m anyen They didn’t tell me a thing.
Soufle bouji a Blow the candle.
souflemòde, mòdesoufle attrib Hypocrite. Gen
anpil moun se rat souflemòde yo ye There are many
people who are two-faced. (The rat bites and then
blows on it so that you don’t feel the pain.)
(syn) kouto de bò.
souflèt 1
la, siflèt la n Whistle. Moun yo soufle
souflèt nan rara tou They blow whistles during
‘rara’ times too.
souflèt 2
la n Slap on the face.
souflete vt To slap.
soufrans la n Suffering*, misery, abeyance, an-
guish.
soufri 1
, ti soufri n Weakling. Li pòtre ak yon ti
soufri He looks like a starving, suffering child.
soufri 2
vi To suffer*, to ail; to endure. Mwen
tou ap soufri soufri’m I got my own troubles. I’m
suffering.
soufrisken an n Starving and suffering person.
soujèmen, soujèm attrib Second (cousins). Cf
E. Cousin-german*.
souke, sekwe vt To shake, to shake out, to
agitate, to wag. Souke kò ou, se nan bal ou ye
Shake a leg; you’re at a dance, you know. Fè you
moun souke pye mango a pou mango mi yo ka tonbe
Make somebody shake the mango tree so that the ripe
mangoes can fall down. Chen an ap souke ke’l The
dog is wagging its tail. vi 1. To shake (be shaking).
Fèy yo ap souke lan van an The leaves are shaking
in the wind.
soukètlarouze V choukètlarouze
soukou V sekou
soukoup la, sekoup n Saucer.
soukous V sekous
soulaje vt To relieve (pain); to soothe, to comfort,
console, cheer up.
soulajman an n Relief.
soulasèldèdo Flat on one’s back. M’jwenn li
kouche sou lasèldèdo I found him lying flat on his
back.
soulay la n Tipsiness, drunkenness.
soule vt To get (slightly) drunk, to make drunk
(tipsy). You sèl vè ponch m’bwè, m’soule One
glass of rhum punch and I’m tipsy.
soulezèl V zèl
S 184
soulezon an n Tipsiness, drunkenness.
souliyen vt To underline (to draw a line under).
soulve vt To raise, to lift.
soulwe vt To sublet.
soulye a n Shoe. Lòt grenn soulye a The other
shoe. Cf. karyoka, sandal, sapat. Gro soulye
1. Old, rough shoes. 2. A vulgar, rustic person.
Soulye kloure Hobnailed shoes. Soulye po bèf Cowhide
shoes.
soumaren an n 1. Submarine*. 2. Spy.
soumèt vt Submit*.
soumoun attrib Fresh, impudent, forward.
soup 1
la n Soup*. M’bwè soup sou tèt ou I’m
much taller than you.
soup 2
attrib Supple*.
soupe 1
a n Supper*, the (evening) meal. Soupe
pare, an’n al a tab Supper is ready, let’s sit at the
table.
soupe 2
vi To eat supper*.
soupi 1
a n Sigh. Pouse soupi To sigh.
soupi 2
a n Type of pastry.
souple (If you) please! Creole for “s’il vous
plaît” (usu) Tanpri souple Please!
soupoudre 1
a n A salted meat preparation.
soupoudre 2
vt To sprinkle (sugar, etc.).
soupriye V sipliye
soupson an n Suspicion*.
soupsonnen vt To suspect*.
souri 1
a n Smile.
souri 2
vi To smile.
sourit la n Mouse.
sous la n Spring, source* (for water); fountain.
souse, sise vt To suck*; to drain. Maladi a te
souse’l The illness drained all his energy.
sousè a n Blood-sucker*, parasite.
sousèt la n 1. Pacifier (baby). 2. Act of sucking*.
Fè sousèt To suck* on (a mango). 3. Type of fish.
sousetrennen, souse trennen n Parasite (a person
who live off others).
sousi 1
a n Eyebrow.
sousi 2
a n Care, concern. San sousi Without any
care whatsoever, complete relaxation.
sousi 3
a n Marigold.
sousòl la n Basement.
sousou a n Flatterer, sycophant, boot-licker.
sousoupannan Startled, surprised. Cf. sezi.
soustraksyon an n Subtraction*.
sout la n Store-room. Sout kafe Coffee depot.
soutirè a, sitirè a n Receiver (of stolen goods).
Also soutirèz (female).
soutni vt To support, to uphold, to hold up, to
reinforce. Manje sa a pou soutni lestonmak ou
Eat this to tide you over until dinner.
soutoutlaliy, sou tout la liy Across the board,
without exception.
soutyen an, soutyengòj la n Bra.
souvan adv Often.
souveye V siveye
souvnans la n Memory.
souvni 1
an n Memory, souvenir*.
souvni 2
(vpr) To remember, to recall. M’pa
souvni’m I don’t recall.
souvren attrib 1. Sovereign*. 2. Efficient, effective.
souye V siye
sovadò a n Habitual runaway, deserter. (Refers
to one who used to run away from an institution,
a foster home, etc.)
sovaj attrib Wild, savage*. Madanm sa a sovaj, li
pa konnen ki jan yo pale ak moun That woman is
wild, she doesn’t know how to talk to people.
sovajri a n Savagery*.
sove vt To save*, to rescue. vi To escape, to
flee, to run away, to get away.
sovtay la n Rescue, salvage*.
sòyèt, sò Yèt n Pitit sò Yèt Plebeian, common, of
low lineage.
spageti a n Spaghetti*.
spekilatè a, espekilatè n Middleman, merchant.
Speculator*. (usu) speculator in coffee and
cocoa beans which he buys from the peasant
and resells to the exporter. This word is usually
applied to this specialty. Gen spekilatè ki malonèt
Some merchants are dishonest.
spektak la, espektak n 1. Show, spectacle*. 2. Scandal,
noise, scene. Se pa you bon spektak It’s
something that’s not nice to see.
spesyal, espesyal attrib Particular, special*.
spesyalman, espesyalman adv Especially*.
spò a, espò n Sport*.
spòtmann nan n Sportsman*.
stad V estad
stasyon an, estasyon n Station*. Stasyon gazolin
Gas station.
185 T
stasyonnen, estasyonnen vi To park.
stat, estat vt To start* (a car). vi To start, to
run. Machin mwen pa vle stat My car won’t start.
statè a, estatè n Starter* (auto). Pàn statè Starter
trouble.
stati a, estati n Statue*.
stik la n Officer’s leather billet. Cf. E. stick*.
stipid, estipid attrib Stupid*, dummy.
stòk la, estòk n Stock*.
stòp, estòp interj Stop*! International anglicism.
stope, estope vt & vi To stop*, to halt.
stropye V estropye
sue, swe vi To sweat. Ou trò renmen byen san swe
You like something for nothing.
suè a, swe, laswè n Sweat, perspiration. Se swe
nan fron’l ki ba li manje It’s the sweat of his brow
that feeds him (He works for a living).
suente, swente vi 1. To seep, to ooze. 2. To wet
one’s pants (with piss, sperm).
suif la, swif n Tallow, grease, oil, animal fat.
Swif balenn Whale oil. (fig) Bay you suif To
reprimand, to let s.o. have it.
suife, swife Ma suife Greasy pole, the buttered
(greased) mast.
suiv, swiv vt 1. To follow. Suiv mwen pou ou pa
pèdi chemen an Follow me so you won’t lose the way.
2. To attend (mass, etc). M’ap swiv yon kou
angle I’m attending a course in English. 3. To
imitate.
suivan, swivan prep Depending on, according
to. Suivan sa l’a di ou Depending on what he’ll
tell you. Cf. dapre.
suivi One (immediately) after the other, in succession.
Twa jou suivi Three days in succession.
swa 1
a n Silk. (attrib) silky, smooth(ly), silken.
Cheve swa Smooth hair as opposed to ‘kinky’ hair.
swa 2
n Evening. Le swa In the evening.
swa 3
... swa conj Either... or.
swadizan Supposedly.
swaf la, swèf n Thirst. (attrib) Thirsty.
sware a, lasware n 1. Evening. 2. Protestant
evening church service. 3. Soirée (evening party).
swasann dis num Seventy.
swasant num Sixty.
swaye V swenyen
swe V sue, suè
swè a, swèt la n Wish.
swèf V swaf
swèl 1
la n Blow with a spur in a cockfight.
V pataswèl.
swèl 2
attrib Tight. Pantalon swèl Tight pants.
swen 1
an n Care. Yo te ba li bon swen They took
good care of him. Pran swen To look after.
swen 2
vt To take care of, to care for.
swente V suente
swenyay la n Proper care and attention. Msye
lan bon swenyay sè jou si He is being really well
taken care of these days.
swenyen, swaye vt To care for, to take special
care of (administering medicine, etc.).
swèt 1
la n South-eastern wind.
swèt 2
la V swè
swete vt To wish. M’swete ou you bon Nwèl I
wish you a merry Christmas.
swètè a, swetè n Sweater*.
swif V suif
swiv V suiv
syanm nan n Type of fabric.
syans la, lasyans n Science*.
syèg attrib Blind (game rooster). As a consequence
of a wound by a spur. (Sp.) ciego.
syèk la n Century; a long while. Gen yon syèk
depi’m voye tigason an al achte sigarèt pou mwen
It’s been a long, long time since I sent the boy to buy
cigarettes.
syèl la, lesyèl n Sky, heaven.
syès la n Siesta*. Sp.
T
t 1
In set phrases or individual words of French
origin, the letter t may replace a d when followed
by a voiceless consonant. Similarly, the d may
replace a t when followed by a voiced consonant.
Example “Po-t-chanm” (in the place of French
“pot de chambre”). Potchanm.
t 2
Contracted form of ‘te’ (marker for the past
tense). Nou t’al la We went there.
ta 1
Would, should. Auxiliary particle used to
form the conditional tense. Jan ta vle al lekòl,
men li pa gen tan John would like to go to school,
but he doesn’t have time. V tava.
ta 2
adv Late. Pita Later, after. Ta kon’l ta Late
as it may be.
ta 3
Yon ta Many, a lot of.
T 186
tab la n Table*. Tab bouche Butcher shop, meat
counter. Tab jwèt Gaming table. Chita, mete ou a
tab Sit (down) at the table.
tabak la n Tobacco*. Nicotiana tabacum L. Ou
a kaka tabak You won’t get a darn thing. Yo pa
ban’m pa tabak They didn’t give me a darn thing.
tabatyè a n Snuff-box.
tablati a n Vicissitude, problem, scandal, trouble.
Nan fè tablati, goumen mete pye Scandal leads to
fighting. Nonm sa a kab mete ou nan tablati That
man can get you into trouble.
tablèt la n Cake or tidbit like a nougat. Flat
pieces of peanut butter candy, peanut brittle.
Here are some types of tablèt: tablèt nwa, tablèt
pistach, tablèt roroli, tablèt kòk, (North) = tablèt
kokoye, etc. When they are sticky, they are called
tablèt lakòl.
tabli 1
V etabli
tabli 2
a n A device consisting of two poles and a
crossbar to which are hung bunches of corn
ears for storage.
tabliye a, tabilye n Apron.
tablo a n Board, blackboard; table*, tableau*;
painting, canvas.
tabòk la n Smack, slap.
tach la 1
n Speck, stain, spot, blemish. Li bezwen
pomad pou figi’l ki gen tach He needs an ointment
for his spotty face. San tach Stainless (spotless).
tach 2
(palmis) n The withered peduncle (the
hard stem or back end) of a palm leaf, which is
detached from the palm tree. Depi tach la sèch
nan palmis la, li pral tonbe When the palm leaf
dries up, it will fall.
tache 1
vt & vi To pin (up), attach*, tie on,
affix, fasten; to be tied or fastened. V mare.
Pran you zepeng nan kwafez la, tache ròb ou ki chire
Take a safety pin on the dressing table and pin up
your dress which is torn.
tache 2
vt To make a spot, stain, to mark, to
leave a spot. (attrib) Spotted i.e. with spots.
Gen anpil frui ki tache rad, pa egzanp zanmann,
zabriko, kokoye... There are many fruits which can
stain clothes, such as almonds, apricots, coconut
(milk)...
tafya a n Tafia*. (An alcoholic beverage distilled
from sugar cane). Sa’m te ba ou la, se te you
paròl tafya What I said to you was the result of
liquor. Tafya blan White (raw) rum.
tafyatè a n Guzzler, drunkard, tippler, boozer.
V tafya, sou, bwesonyè, karavachè, grògmann.
tak, titak Drop (of liquid). Used as a partitive
particle. Cf. Tigout. (usu) Titak A bit of,
some. Li pa ban’m tak He didn’t give me a bit.
takantak V tenkantenk
take vt To latch, to lock, to bolt. Anvan ou pati,
pa bliye take lòt pòt la Before you leave, don’t forget
to bolt the other door.
takèt la n Door-latch, bolt (slide).
takinen vt To tease.
tako a n Type of bird, reddish in color, the size
of a ‘boustabak’.
taks la n Tax*.
taksi a n Taxi*, cab.
takte 1
a n Freckle. Mi an bèl; li gan yon pakèt
takte penti ladan’l The wall is beautiful; it has
many blobs of paint on it.
takte 2
attrib Freckled, marked, spotted, speckled.
Figi’l takte kodenn His face is spotted like a turkey.
talan an n Talent*.
talatàn nan n Cotton material. Type of hoop
skirt to enlarge the appearance of the body.
talè, toutalè, titalè adv In a moment, soon,
presently. Cf. talè a.
talè a, toutalè a, titalè a adv A moment ago.
talon an n Heel. Pa rete la, ban’m talon ou Don’t
stand there. Go away! You klou pike talon’m I got
a nail stuck in my heel. Talon bwa Wooden heel.
Demitalon Medium-sized heel. Talon kikit High,
thin heels, spike heels.
talonnen vt To follow closely on s.o.’s tail; to
touch s.o.’s heels, to spy on. M’sye ap talonnen’m,
li pa kab jwenn mwen The man is following me
close to my heels, but he can’t catch me.
tamaren an, tonmaren n Tamarind* (tree). Tamarindus
indica, L.
tami an, tanmi n Large, coarse sieve used by
masons to sift gravel.
tan 1
an n Time. A tan On time. Pou tout tan
Forever. Nan tan lontan Long ago. Nan tan Benbo
In the old days of admiral Bimbow (or) A very long
time ago. An de tan twa mouvman In a jiffy; in no
time at all. Tanzantan, de tanzantan From time to
time, every now and then, at times, once in a while.
Gen tan a) To have time; already. Li pa gen
tan manje He did not have time to eat. Doktè a te
di Andre tap mouri jèn, poutan li gen tan vin vye li
poko mouri The doctor had said that Andrew was
going to die young; yet he lived to become old. In
fact he’s still living. b) Very much; so. Li gen
tan sou He is so drunk. Ou gen tan kontrolè, fè sa
m’di a You like to argue too much; do what I told
you to do. Li gen tan konn manje He really eats a
lot.
tan 2
an n Weather. Kouman tan an ye jodi a?
How is the weather today? Bo tan Nice weather.
Move tan Bad weather. Also hard times.
tan 3
adv So, so much (used to express an
indefinite figure). M’peye tan pou liv la I paid so
much (a certain amount) for the book.
187 T
tan 4
V tanpou
tan 5
... tan adv So much as, as much as. Tan
l’manje se tan l’bwè He eats as much as he drinks.
tanbou a n Drum. Ou konn bat tanbou? Do you
play the drum? Gen tanbou djaz, tanbou madigra,
tanbou marengwen, tanbou asòtò, etc, etc.
tanbouren an n ‘Mosquito drum’. A miniature
two-headed drum (COURLANDER).
tanbourinè a n Drummer.
tanbouye a n Drummer.
tandans la n Tendency*. Li gen tandans vomi lò’l
fin manje He has a tendency to vomit after eating.
tandantan Yesteryear, a long time ago. Depi tandantan
Ages ago.
tande 1
a n Hearing. Tande zòrèy la Inner part of
the ear.
tande 2
vt & vi 1. To hear; to understand; to
listen; to overhear. 2. To obey, to heed (a warning),
to listen.
tandiske conj While, whereas.
tanè a n Tanner*.
tanga a n (pop) Loin-cloth, pagne, old skirt,
waist-piece for peasants. Pòv tifi a! Li pa gen
rad, li oblige mete you moso tanga sou li Poor girl!
She doesn’t have a dress. She’s obliged to wear a
piece of loin-cloth.
tange vi 1. To pitch (a boat). 2. To vacillate, to
go slowly from side to side as a boat. (syn)
dangoye, roule (de bò).
tank la 1
n Tank*.
tank 2
, tan So, so much; as long as, while,
inasmuch as. Tank... tank The more... the more.
tankou, kankou As, like (prep). Fè tankou’l Do
as he does. 2. As if (conj). Li fè tankou li pa wè’l
He pretended he didn’t see him.
tanmen vi To begin and continue to do something
(followed by a verb). vt To initiate, to start.
tann 1
attrib Tender*. Pwa tann Green beans (still
in the pods).
tann 2
vt & vi To wait (for), expect. Cf. E.
Attend*. Li fèt pou’l tann He has to wait.
tann 3
vt To extend*, stretch, to display, spread.
Mari ap tann rad nan solèy Marie is spreading the
clothes to dry in the sun. Tann (ranje, fè) kabann
To make the bed. Tann you pyèj To set a trap.
tanndat Depi tanndat For a long time (in the past).
Depi tanndat m’ap tann ou I have been waiting for
you for such a long time.
tannen vt To tan* (skin).
tanp la n 1. Temple* (anat). 2. Church.
tanpe, etanpe vt To mark, to brand (an animal).
Stamp*.
tanperaman an n Temperament*, character.
tanperati a n Temperature*. Does not mean
‘fever’. V lafyèv.
tanpèt la n Tempest*, storm.
tanpete vi To raise a storm, to make a big fuss.
tanpi Too bad, so much the worse.
tanpon an n Pad, stamp-pad, wad.
tanponnen, taponnen vt 1. To dab, to dampen.
2. To mark with a rubber stamp.
tanpou, tan pou Instead of.
tanpri Please! V souple.
tànri a, tannri n Tannery*.
tansèlman But (only). Amize’n, viv lavi, tansèlman
pa bliye gen demen Enjoy, live it up but don’t forget
there is a tomorrow.
tansyon an n 1. Stress, tension*. Li sou tansyon
He’s under pressure, hard-pressed. 2. Blood pres-
sure.
tant 1
la, matant, tantin, tantant n Aunt*, auntie*.
tant 2
la n Tent*.
tantasyon an n Temptation*. Bay tantasyon To
tempt*.
tante vt 1. To tempt*, to entice. 2. Tante chans
To try one’s luck.
tantin 1
nan n Auntie*. Tantin tann tonton Trap
supposedly with magical powers used by the peasants
to protect their gardens.
tantin 2
meyèt n A go-between (female adult)
specially between young people.
tanzantan adv From time to time.
tanzaòt adv From time to time, once in a while.
taode, tarode vt To plane a board, to cut (thread)
(a pipe). Pou ebenis yo kole de moso planch, yo
taode toulede byen taode pou youn byen chita sou lòt
In order for cabinet makers to glue two planks of
wood, they plane them ‘til they shine so that one can
sit well on the other.
tap 1
, tape, te ap Auxiliary of the progressive past
tense. M’tap vini lè’l ale I was coming when he
left.
tap 2
la n A tap, slap (usu) on the hand with the
open hand. Manman’l ba’l you tap nan dèyè His
mother gave him a slap on his behind.
tapaj la n Row (noise). Fè tapaj To talk, making
a lot of noise; fuss, trouble.
tapajè attrib Loudmouth, roudy, quarrelsome,
noisy.
T 188
tapan adv Exactly, sharp. A senkè tapan At five
sharp.
tape 1
vt 1. To slap, to beat, to hit, to tap*. Ti
gason an ap mache tout tan; papa’l di’l, m’ap tape
ou si ou pa vle chita The boy walks all the time. His
father says to him: I’m going to beat you, if you
won’t sit down. 2. To type. Aprann tape a la
machin; l’a itil ou Learn to type; it will be useful to
you.
tape 2
, tap, tep Auxiliary of the progressive past
tense. Li tape mange He was eating.
tapi a n Rug, carpet.
tapisri a n Tapestry*. Lontan yo te konn fè bèl
tapisri A long time ago they used to make beautiful
tapestries. Fè tapisri To be a wall flower, i.e. not to
be invited to dance.
tapral, taprale Was (were) going (to).
taptap 1
la n Bus, a type of jitney bus, pick-up
bus, which originally went from Port-au-Prince
to Carrefour (suburb). Each one is gay, carefree,
and on-the-go. More important for philologists
is that each one has a name, picturesque, indicative,
and suggestive. Each small truck has wooden
benches adapted to them.
taptap 2
adv Fast, in a jiffy.
tapyoka a n Tapioca*.
tarode V taode
tas la n Cup.
tase vt To tamp, pack (earth, etc). To shake
down objects in a box, etc.
taso a n Dried meat. Meat which has been
seasoned, allowed to dry in the sun, and then
grilled. Cf. Sp. tasajo. Mèg kou taso las-kwendeng
To be skin and bones, to be very thin, emaciated.
tata 1
a n Stool (excrement), shit. Fè tata To
have a bowel movement. V okabine, kaka.
tata 2
vi To make poopoo, to defecate, to shit.
tatawèl la n Great, great grandmother. Sp.
tatarabuela. V grangrann.
tate vt To feel, to touch in order to check and
verify, to finger. Abitan an tate poul la pou wè si’l
gen ze The farmer fingered the hen to see if she had
eggs.
tatonnen vt To grope, to feel one’s way around.
tava Would, should. Auxiliary of the conditional.
V ta. Ou tava di’m pouki You would tell me why.
tavèno a, tabèno n Species of hardwood which
takes a beautiful polish and consequently is highly
prized for furniture. Lysiloma latisliqua (L)
Benth.
tavle Poud tavle Charm, magic (love) potion.
tay 1
la n 1. Size, height. 2. Hip, waist. 3. Tay ba
Low hips, a dance posture (COURLANDER).
4. Yon tay... A huge... Yon tay moun A huge
person.
tay 2
la n Pencil sharpener.
taye vt 1. To cut (out), to chop, to prune, to
clip, to trim. 2. To spank, to whip, to flog.
3. To overcome, beat, win (in a game). 4. To
go to bed with, to screw. 5. To cut (square
stones). 6. To sharpen (pencil). Taye banda
To walk elegantly, to cut capers, to show off.
tayè a n 1. Tailor*. 2. Ladies’ two piece suit.
tayo a n Type of vegetable (South). In Port-auPrince
it is called “malanga”.
taza a n Kingfish, cero (a fish of the mackerel
family).
tchak 1
la, latchak n Disease of chickens.
tchak 2
attrib Old fashioned and strict (Neol).
Disagreeable.
tchaka a n Pounded corn (cooked food) which
mixed with other ingredients become a soup.
Cf. Sp. machaca.
tchakade vt To assassinate, to chop to pieces.
Ansasen an tchakade madanm nan ak kouto pou’l
pran lajan’l The assassin murdered the lady with a
knife to get her money.
tchake vt To pick, to stab; to cut up, to chop
(up).
tchaktchak vt To pierce, chop repeatedly.
tchala a n Reference book for “bòlèt” players.
tchanpan an, tyanpan n 1. Junk. 2. Junk food.
Worthless food. Li manje tout vye tyanpan He
eats all kinds of bad food.
tchanse, tyanse vi To talk nonsense, to babble.
tchap la n Cap, forage cap.
tchatcha 1
a n 1. Lelbek (Albizia lelbek) (L.)
Benth. A tree, the seeds of which, when dry
and shaken, make a noise similar to the chacha
rhythm. 2. A musical instrument made with seeds
inside a gourd to which a handle has been at-
tached.
tchatcha 2
vi To get along, to make a living.
Kouman sa? M’ap tchatcha How are you? I’m
getting along.
tchaw 1
la n Cheap food, junk food.
tchaw 2
Good-bye. Milanese ‘sciavo’: your slave).
It. ciao, schiavo.
tche V ke
tchè V kè
tchèk la n Check* (control).
tcheke, tyeke vt To check*.
tchèkòp la n Check-up* (medical, etc).
189 T
tchèl la n Small change. Sp.
tchenkon An tchenkon Piece by piece, piecemeal,
partly.
tchimen V kimen
tchipe V kuipe
tchit V kit
tchòbòl la n Trouble*, problem, difficulty.
tchoka vt To shell coffee beans in a mortar.
tchòtchòwè attrib Good for nothing, nosy.
tchou a n Rectum, rear, behind, anus. Tchou
boutèy Bottom of a bottle.
tchoubouloung Mess, disarray. Lage yon peyi lan
tchoubouloung To put a country in disarray, upside
down.
tchouboum V tyouboum
tchoul V tyoul
tchoule V rekile
tchouloulout la, tchouloulou a n Diarrhea.
te 1
, t Past and pluperfect marker. Was, were;
has, had been. Yè m’te wè ou lavil I saw you
downtown yesterday. M’t’al dòmi lakay I had gone
to sleep at home.
te 2
Apocope of “kite” used as imperative only.
Te’m wè Let me see.
te 3
a n Concoction, tea*, infusion. The variant
“dite” is used in the North.
tè a, latè a n Earth, land, soil, ground, estate. A
tè On land, on the ground. Tè a mouye The earth
is wet. Anba tè Underground. Leve a tè a Stand
up. Pye a tè Barefoot, extremely poor. Mete a tè
To bear (give birth). Mete pwa a tè To plant peas
(Said after a good October shower). An tè Earthen.
Pa tè Overland (travel). Sou latè beni Here
on earth. Tè frèt Poor land (cold earth). Tè cho
Rich soil (hot land). Tè gra Clay.
tèdoreye a, tèt doreye, sak zoreye n Pillow case.
tèk 1
la n Fillip, a slight flick made with the
thumb and forefinger (or middle finger). Fè
you tèk Make a shot at marbles. Jan ban’m you tèk
nan zòrèy John gave me a snap on the ear.
tèk 2
Nothing, no, none. Ou a tèk You will get
nothing. FRANKETIENNE/D-125: Apre sa, pa
tèk! After that, nothing!
teke vt 1. To hit (barely). 2. (Term used in the
game of marbles, etc). To shoot (marbles)
with the thumb, or to kick slightly a ball (in a
soccer game).
tèktègèdèk Firm, steadfastly. Cf. tennfas.
tèl indef adj Such, such a. You tèl bagay Such a
thing. De tèl istwa Such stories.
tèldi tèlfè No sooner said than done.
teledyòl la n Transmittal of news by words of
mouth; bush telegraph.
telefòn nan n Telephone*, phone*.
telefone, telefonen vt To telephone*, to phone*,
to call up.
telegraf la n Telegraph*.
telegrafye vt To cable, to telegraph*.
telegram nan n Telegram*.
tèleka, teleka, tèl le ka Supposing, if for instance...
televizyon an n Television*, TV*.
tèlman, si tèlman adv So. Yo si tèlman rich They
are so rich.
tèm attrib Sound, ok.
tèmòs la n Thermos* bottle.
temwen an n Witness.
ten 1
V eten
ten 2
an n Thyme*.
tenbal la n 1. Drinking cup. 2. Kettle-drum,
timbal*. Antiquated Italian musical term.
tenbre V papye
tenèb la n 1. Darkness. 2. Tenebrae*. 3. On
Good Friday at 3:00 p.m., children will “Bat
tenèb” or strike any metal object continuously.
tenis la n Lawn tennis*. (Soulier) tennis, tennis
shoes.
tenkantenk, takantak adv Tit for tat.
tenm nan, tenb n Postage stamp, tax stamp.
tenmpla, tenmplaw On the same level, in agree-
ment.
tenn vt To dye, to stain*. Li tenn cheve’l trò
souvan She dyes her hair too often.
tennès la, tenès n Tenesmus*. (An urgent desire
to urinate or defecate without ability to do so).
tennfas adv Firmly, steadfast*(ly).
tensèl V etensèl
tenten an n Nonsense, ridicule; something of no
value. Tenten! Nothing doing, no go! M’pa lan
tenten avè ou I’m not in the mood to joke with you.
Ou rive lan kalfou tenten Now you’ve become ridiculous.
Fè tenten To act silly, to misbehave.
tentennad la n Stupid behavior; a flop; nonsense.
tenti a n Dye.
tentidyòd la n Tincture of iodine*.
teny nan, lateny n Scab, scurvy.
tenyen vt (pop) To turn off, to extinguish*, to
put out. Tenyen bouji a Put out the candle. Tenyen
je To close one eye temporarily in the manner of
T 190
calling the attention of someone to something; to
wink. Tenyen lanp la anvan ou dòmi Turn off the
light before going to sleep. V etenn.
tep la n 1. Popular in hotels, restaurants etc. for
tip. 2. Tape* (recording tape, scotch tape).
V tip.
tepe vt To tape*.
teras la, lateras n 1. Terrace*, open space; plateau.
2. Highway, main road. Yo mete kafe seche sou
teras They put the coffee beans on the terrace to dry.
terasman an n 1. Digging, tamping, rolling of
the earth for roadwork or construction. 2. Road.
tere V antere
terebantin nan n Turpentine*.
teren an n Field, plot of ground. Terrain*.
teri, ateri vi To end up (at).
terib attrib Terrible*, dreadful, awful.
terin nan n Earthen pan, crock, terrine*. V kanari,
madoken.
teritwa a n Territory*.
testaman an n Will, testament*.
teste vt To check, check on (somebody), to try,
to make a test*, to verify.
tèt la n 1. Head. 2. Self. 3. Top. Examples and
expressions. Tèt mòn Mountain top, mountain
peak, summit. (“Tèt” followed by the possessive
adj corresponding to the subject = “self” preceded
by the respective pronoun, in reflexive verbs).
Tèt mwen Myself. Tèt yo Themselves. Li tiye tèt li
He committed suicide (not merely ‘He killed himself
accidentally’). L’ap tiye tèt li travay He tries
hard. He is killing himself with work. Ou fatige tèt
ou tròp You’re worrying too much. Tèt kay Roof
(“do kay” is more commonly used). Sou tèt
On top of. Tèt chaje Troubles; troublesome person.
M’pa vle gen tèt chaje avèk bagay ou yo I don’t
want any trouble with your business. Yo dòmi
tètanke Both of them sleep in one bed; the head of
one is next to the other’s feet. Tèt kale 1. A
person who is completely bald-headed or with
close-shaven head. 2. Also a person of no importance
(usu) vye ti tèt kale. Yon ti tètkale A
small fry (as opposed to ‘a big shot’). Tèt koupe
Spitting image. Tèt nèg Expensive. Yo mande tèt
nèg pou yon zaboka Avocado pears are very expensive.
Tèt zòtèy The tips (heads) of the toes. Tètpabyen
Crazy. Poutèt sa For that reason, therefore. Tèt dlo
a The source (head) of the river, spring. Gade you
tèt pay; li pa penyen Look at that straw head; he
didn’t comb himself. Lanmò pitit li a pote’l lan tèt
His child’s death was too much for him and made
him ill. Tèt kokolo Empty-headed person, or one
with very little hair on his ill-shaped head. M’pa
gen tèt I can’t remember. Cf. Neap. Nun tengo
capo. id. Tèt zòrye Pillow case (confused with
‘tèdoreye’). FRANKETIENNE/D-197: Filojèn
kase tèt tounen Filojèn turned back. Tèt poul Forgetful
(person). Tèt di Hard headed, stubborn; stubborness.
Fè tèt To give (or) get a haircut; to style (set) hair.
L’al fè tèt li He went to have a haircut. Tèt vire
Dizziness. Bay tèt (sou) To head (towards). Li lan
tèt jwèt li Now he is in his element, that’s his cup of
tea. Li pèdi tèt li He went out of his mind. Li rann
tèt li He gave himself up. Tèt chòv Bald head. Tèt
grenn Kinky hair. Tèt graton, tèt gridap, tèt kròt
Sparse, kinky hair. Yo kale tèt ou They scalped
you; they made you pay too much. Tèt anba Upside
down. Tèt bika Big head. Tèt jiròf Cloves (spice).
Tèt kole Cheek to cheek (dancing). Tèt fè mal,
maltèt Headache. Tèt li varye He is raving. Se
pou’n met tèt nou ansanm Let’s put our minds
together. Kabòch tèt, kabòs tèt, kràn tèt, kòkòròs tèt
Head. Tèt mato Awkward; hammer-head; bad driver;
clumsy.
teta a n Chub, tadpole.
tetanos la n Tetanus*.
tete 1
a n Breast(s), bosom, teat*, breastfeeding.
Bouton tete Breast nipple. Timoun nan tete Infant
(one not yet weaned, still nursing). Li bay pitit
la tete 18 mwa She nursed the baby for 18 months.
tete 2
vt To suck, to suckle. Tete kreyon ou Make
a note of it. Wet your pencil. vi To nurse, to
breastfeed. Pitit la tete de fwa deja The baby has
been breastfed twice already.
tètfèmal la n Headache.
teti attrib Obstinate, stubborn.
tetin nan n Nipple of child’s baby bottle.
tetyè a n Head-stall (harness); baby bonnet.
teyat la, teat n 1. Theater*. 2. Spectacle, comedy.
Cf. Colloquial E. show.
ti 1
(Prefix) small, little. V piti.
ti 2
Here, please? Yon fwa ou di “ti”, ou pa dwe di
ou pa la Once you say “yes” you can’t say you’re not
there. (‘Ti’ is a shortened form of ‘plètil’).
tib la n Tube*.
tibebe a, ti bebe n Baby*, infant.
tibèkiloz la n Consumption, tuberculosis*, T.B.*.
tibèt la n Insect, small animal.
tibilan attrib Turbulent*, unruly.
tibòm n Type of mint. Mentha arvensis L.
Mentha nemorosa Willd.
tichat la, ti chat la n Kitten.
tichemen an n Track, path.
tichen an n Puppy.
tidejene a n Breakfast.
tidifeboule n Provocation (Prodding two persons
to fight).
tif la n Tuff*, tufa*, clay soil. (usu) tè tif.
191 T
tifi 1
a n Girl. Tifi a pral fè premyè kominyon’l
mwa prochen The girl will make her first communion
next month.
tifi 2
attrib Virgin. Li te tifi toujou She was still a
virgin.
tifle vt To eat too much. V gobe, bafre.
tifoyid la n Typhoid*. Fyèv tifoyid Typhoid*
(fever).
tig la n Tiger*. Chen tig A dark brown dog with
black or dark brown spots.
tigason an, ti gason n Boy, lad.
tigigit n Penis, birdie (small boy’s).
tigout, ti gout A bit, a little bit. V enpe, (ti)
kras.
tigranmoun, ti granmoun attrib Child who speaks
and acts like an adult (pej).
tij la n Stem.
tijezi n Godchild. Tijezi nan po krab A hypocrite,
one who is acting like a saint but is really dishonest.
tijoudlan an n New garment worn on New Year’s
Day. Any Sunday best suit.
tik la n Tick* (parasite). Zòrèy chen an plen tik
The dog’s ears are full of ticks. 2. Tic* (twitching).
tikè a n Ticket*. Perhaps used more frequently
than ‘biye’ (V).
tikochon an n Piglet, little pig.
tikòk la n Penis, birdie.
tikoulout, koulout attrib Tightwad, stingy, penny
pincher.
tikrabè n An unimportant, insignificant, very
small person.
tikras Some, a little bit of.
tikrik tikrak Pou tikrik tikrak For any reason at all.
til la n Screen (metallic); tull* (fabric).
tilapya a n A fish living, among many other
places, in Letan Bwanèf near the city of St. Marc.
tilip la n Tulip*.
tiloulout la n Penis, birdie.
tilyon an, ti lyon n (Lion) cub.
timal n Young man, guy (familiar).
timalis, ti malis n 1. Popular hero of Haitian
folk tales. 2. Type of banana of superb taste
and the size of your middle finger. Fig timalis
vann de pou 5 kòb Ti malice bananas cost two for a
penny. 3. Cunning person.
timè a n Tumor*.
timedam yo, ti medam n Girls, young ladies.
timesye yo, ti mesye n Young men, youngsters.
timi V pitimi
timid attrib Timid*, shy, bashful, fearful.
timoun nan, ti moun n Child. Timoun piti Small
child.
timouton an n Lamb.
timtim! bwa chèch! Formula used to introduce
the telling of riddles after dark. The person
asking the riddles says, “timtim”! The audience
answers “bwa chèch”. Then the riddle begins.
tinon an n Nickname, pet name.
tip 1
la n Guy, fellow, chap. Cf. E. Type*.
tip 2
la, tep n Tip*, pourboire.
tipen an, ti pen n Roll (bread).
tipichout la n Penis, birdie.
tipitit la n Child.
tipoul la n Chick(en).
tiraj la n Drawing (lottery).
tiran an n Tyrant*.
tire vt 1. To pull, to draw. 2. To shoot, to gun
down. 3. To stretch. Examples and expressions:
Tire dlo To draw water, to scoop. Tire bèf To milk
a cow. Tire pòtre To take a picture. Tire bagay la
o klè To bring something into the open, to clarify it.
Mete tire To open fire. Ki lè y’ap tire lotri a?
What’s the date of the lottery drawing. Li tire’m yon
kout pye He aimed a kick at me. He kicked me.
Tire kat To play cards. Pa tire kont lajounen, sa
pa bon Don’t tell stories during the day, it brings
bad luck. Tire pye To kick. L’ap tire kò’l He is
stretching himself.
tirè 1
a n Dash (line).
tirè 2
a n (Sharp) shooter.
tirèdkont la n Storyteller.
tirivyè a n Stream.
tiròch la n Pebble.
tironrale a n A common type of loaf of bread.
tiròz n Menstrual period.
tirwa a, tiwa, tiwèt la n Drawer. (fig) Storehouse.
tisale a n Salt pork.
tise vt To weave.
tit la n Title*.
titak V tak
titalè V talè
titato n 1. Tic-tac-toe* (tip-tap-toe*) (game).
2. Type of candy.
titile, tchitchile vi 1. Titile bò ronn To shoot the
marble slowly around the circle. 2. To struggle, to
eke out a living. To hobble along, to get along.
T 192
titit la n Baby. (syn) ti bebe.
tito a n Type of candy.
tiwa V tirwa
tiwèl la n Trowel*.
tiye, touye, tchwe vt 1. To kill, to slay. 2. To put
out, to quench, to extinguish (a fire). 3. To
turn out, to switch off, to put out (a light).
4. Refl. Li tiye tèt li He killed himself. Yo pat kab
soufri ankò, yo touye tèt yo They could not suffer
anymore, so they killed themselves.
tiyo a n Pipe, flue, tube, pipe-line.
tiyon 1
an n Headband.
tiyon 2
an n Haitian hairdo made with a kerchief
forming a beautiful tail in the back of the neck.
tizàn nan, tizann n Infusion of a watered herb
tea, decoction.
tizon an n 1. Firebrand. 2. A person who likes
to torment (tease) others. Madan’m ki metrès
kay sa a se you tizon pou lokatè yo; li pa vle yo fè
anyen nan lakou a The lady, the owner of that house
is a torture for the tenants. She doesn’t want them
to do anything in the yard.
tizonnen vt To egg on, to keep urging, annoy.
tò a n Gen tò To be wrong. Fè ditò To harm.
tobi a n Mule.
tobout la n 1. Jail, prison. 2. A powerful man.
tòchon an n 1. Rag (for cleaning in the kitchen),
dish-cloth, dish-towel. 2. Dish cloth gourd, vegetable
sponge, a climbing plant which, when
dry is used for cleaning purposes.
tòchonnen vt To soil, to make dirty.
tòde, tòdye vt To twist, bend, wring (clothes).
Lapli mouye tout rad li; konnyea l’ap tòde’l pou’l
seche’l The rain soaked her dress; now she’s wringing
it to dry it. vi Li tap tòde anba vant fè mal He
was twitching (twisting, suffering) with a belly ache.
tòk la n Pack-saddle. V ba a.
tokay la n Of the same first name. Cf. Sp.
“tocayo”. Yo se tokay They have the same first
name. “Nou nan tray tokay” We are in trouble,
partner (title of a play in Creole by Roni Lucien
Angomar).
toke attrib Crazy. V toloke.
tòkèt V tròkèt
tòktòk attrib Crazy. “Tetched”.
tòl 1
la n Corrugated sheet iron; metal container
(4-5 gallons).
tòl 2
, tòltòl attrib Crazy, out of one’s mind. Tout
brui sa yo ap fè’m tòl All that noise is driving me
out of my mind. Rann yon moun tòltòl To drive s.o.
crazy.
tolalito n Children’s game. Fè tolalito To go on
a wild goose chase.
toleran attrib Tolerant*.
tolerans la n Tolerance*.
tolere vt To tolerate*, to endure, to stand for.
tolit la n Song of a small lizard (zandolit) V.
toloke vt To drive (s.o.) crazy.
tòlòkòtò attrib Blabbermouth. Jako tòlòkòtò Talkative
parrot (well-known song).
tolomonèl la n Cocktail made with lemon and
‘kleren’.
tòltòl V tòl
tomat la, tonmat la n Tomato. Tonmat vèt!
What the hell! Jesus Christ! Good grief!
ton 1
an n Tone* (of the voice, of a song).
ton 2
n Apocope for ‘tonton’, uncle. Ton Alfred
Uncle Alfred.
ton 3
an n Tuna*.
tòn nan n Ton*. You kamyon de tòn A two-ton
truck.
tonbe vi To fall (down), to fall over, to trip, to
tumble, to collapse, to give way, to sink; to fall
in love; to subside (wind). Examples and expressions:
Maladi tonbe Epilepsy. Li tonbe sou
chwal la He fell from the horse. Tonbe feblès To
fall from weakness, from sickness. Tonbe sou To
run into, to bump into, to meet unexpectedly. Tonbe
nan To take on, to fall into (the habit of). When
‘tonbe’ is followed by another verb, it indicates
the commencement and continuity of the action
expressed by the following verb. Tonbe danse To
start dancing. Kon mizik frape ayisyen tonbe danse
At the sound of the music, Haitians start dancing.
Tonbe pou To fall for, to fall in love with. Fi a
tonbe pou nonm nan She fell for the man, i.e. She
fell in love with him.
tonbola a n School or church gathering, where
games are played, such as bingo, grab-bag, etc.
tonbolokoto attrib Huge, enormous.
tondèz la n Clippers for hair.
tonèl la, tonnèl n 1. Shed covered with leaves or
straw. 2. Bower, arbo(u)r, a covering on stakes
over the “hounfò” court.
tonm nan n Tomb*, grave stone.
tonmaren V tamaren
tonmat V tomat
tonmtonm nan n Food made from breadfruit to
which okra (gumbo) is usually added. (This
word is used mostly in the Jérémie area).
tonn vt To clip. Tonn tèt To clip the hair
completely.
193 T
tonnè Means “lightning, thunder”. Tonnè kraze’m,
tonnè boule’m (May lightning strike me!) Tonnè!
Damn it!
tonnèl V tonèl
tonnis interj 1. Darn it! (euph) for ‘tonnè’.
tonpe V tronpe
tonton 1
an n Uncle; old man (as in many
languages). Also means huge, very large.
tonton 2
makout la n 1. Bogeyman (folklore).
2. Applied in the last few years in a political
context.
Tonton 3
Nwèl n Father Christmas. Santa Claus.
tope vi To agree, consent, be in accord; to
shake hands as an indication of accord. An’n
tope Let’s shake on it. Agreed.
topi a, toupi a n Spinning top.
topinanbou a n Jerusalem artichoke. Calathea
allouia Lindl.
topsi V otopsi
toro a n 1. The bull. More frequently ‘toro bèf’
2. Awe-inspiring, unbeatable person. 3. Kann toro
Type of sugar cane.
torya a n Especially in the expression Voye torya
To speak in parables, cast allusions. Sp.
tòt attrib Perfect, good, OK, comme il faut. Cf.
total kapital.
total 1
la n Total*.
total 2
attrib Perfect, first-rate. Total kapital Outstanding,
absolutely perfect. (syn) ki bon nèt.
tòti 1
a n Turtle*. Tòti lanmè Sea turtle. V karèt.
tòti 2
a n Torture*.
tòtire vt To torture*.
totolo a n A far away, high place.
tòtòt 1
la n Teat. V tete. Fè tòtòt To suck (e.g.
the juice of a mango, after having pricked a
hole in it, and after having softened it).
tòtòt 2
vt To suck, to drink in.
tòtòy Je tòtòy Squinting, sickly eyes. Janm tòtòy
Bow-legged.
tou 1
Also, too. Popular French uses “itou”, and
Canadian French uses “itou” and “tou”.
tou 2
adv 1. Once and for all, at the same time.
An’n tou manje, nou pa bezwen tann pita Let’s eat
once and for all, let’s not wait till later. 2. Altho,
even tho. Deniz pran chante chante a, tou bèbè li ye
a Denise starts singing the song, even tho she can’t
even talk.
tou 3
V trou
tou 4
a n 1. Tour*, walk; turn. Fè tou kay la Go
around the house. 2. Trick. Li jwe’m you move
tou He played a dirty trick on me.
tou 5
All. Tou sa All that. Tou lòt jou Recently, a
few days ago. Tou piti Tiny, all so tiny.
toub V troub
toubiyon an, toubouyon n Whirlwind.
toubiyonnen vi To whirl (around), to swirl
(around), to become turbulent*.
touch la n Throw-in (soccer).
touchatou (Little) meddler, who can’t keep his
hands off things.
touche 1
vt To earn, to collect (money), to cash
(a check). vi To get paid.
touche 2
vt 1. To touch*. Se touche tounen It’s
touch and go. 2. To affect, to touch*.
toudabò adv In the first place.
toude Both (of them). Also toulede.
toudenkou adv Suddenly.
toudi vt To daze, stun. Lò ou travay nan solèy
cho, li toudi ou When you work in the hot sun, it
makes you dizzy.
toudin, latoudin n M’gen latoudin My head is
spinning.
toudinpyès All in one piece*.
toudisman V etoudisman
toudwat, toudrèt adv Straight ahead.
touf la n Clump, tuft*, pile, flock. Chak swa you
touf zwazo vini domi Every night a flock of birds
perch on the tree; they go to sleep.
toufa vamalore interj The hell with you! (a
curse).
toufe vt 1. To suffocate, to smother, to choke,
to stifle, to strangle. 2. To steam, to stew, to
braise in a closed vessel. Toufe you manje To
steam, stew food in a closed vessel. Toufe berejenn
Eggplant stew. 3. To suppress (scandal). vi To
suffocate, to choke. Si mwen pa rele, m’a toufe If
I don’t cry out loud, I’ll choke. Se toufe li tap toufe
He was choking with (contained) anger.
toufi attrib Bushy, thick.
toufounen vt To beat up, give a good thrashing,
punch; choke, stifle, to beat the hell out of,
rough up, shake up.
toujou adv Always, still, yet. Papa’m te toujou di
sa My father always said that. Li isi toujou? Is he
still here?
toule, tou le Every. Toule lendi Every Monday.
toulede, tou le de Both (of them).
toulejou, tou le jou adv Everyday, always.
T 194
toulongsayd 1. Straight ahead without stopping.
2. In its full length*, flat on its side*.
touman an, toumant la n 1. Torment*, pain.
2. Adversity, misfortune, problems, difficulty.
toumante vt To torment*. (attrib) Tormented*,
fidgety, uneasy, disturbed, restless.
toundis la n Record player, phonograph.
tounen 1
an n A round of. Li ofri yon tounen gròg
He offered a round of grog.
tounen 2
vi 1. To get back, to return*, to come
back, to go back. 2. To turn*. 3. To turn* into,
to become, to be transformed into. Chini te
tounen yon bèl papiyon The caterpillar had become a
beautiful butterfly.
tounen 3
vi To become sour, to turn* sour (milk).
touni V toutouni
tounvis la, tounavis la n Screw-driver. Tounvis
zetwal Phillip’s screw-driver.
toupatou adv. Everywhere.
toupi V topi
toupizi vt To pound, to beat the hell out of.
touris la n Tourist*.
tous la, latous n Cough.
touse 1
vi To cough. M’touse anpil yè swa I
coughed very much last night. Li gen maladi touse
He has tuberculosis. Moun touse A consumptive
person (with tuberculosis) who is constantly coughing.
Li mouri touse He died of tuberculosis.
touse 2
V trouse
tousi a n Cuffing of trousers.
tousuit, touswit, toutsuit adv Immediately, right
away.
tout 1
indef adj All, every; whole. Tout ayisyen
Every Haitian. Tout kay yo All the houses.
tout 2
indef pron All. Tout vini All came.
tout 3
See the compound words toutsuit, toutafè,
toutalantou, toutalè, toutalè a, toutbagay, toutbon,
toutespre, toutlasentjounen, toutispatatis,
toutjan, toutmoun, toutotan, toutotou.
toutafè adv Altogether, completely, quite.
toutalantou adv (All) around.
toutalè V talè
toutalè a V talè a
toutbagay, tout bagay indef pron Everything.
toutbon adv Really, for good.
toutespre adv Expressly*.
toutispatatis la n A person who takes undue
advantage of everything.
toutjan, tout jan Anyway. Toutjan toutmannyè Anyway
whatever.
toutlasentjounen, tout la sent jounen adv All day
long.
toutmoun, tout moun indef pron Everybody.
toutokontrè On the contrary*, just the opposite.
toutotan As long as.
toutotou prep All around.
toutou a, toutous la n 1. Small dog, puppy.
2. Darling.
toutoun nan n Tiny girl’s vagina. Also a nickname.
toutouni, touni, ni attrib Naked, nude*.
toutouniste a n Nudity*, nakedness. Lè li te lan
toutouniste When he was poor.
toutous V toutou
toutrèl la n Turtle*-dove.
toutsuit V tousuit
touttan, tout tan adv Always, forever, for all
seasons; as long as.
touyatwa, tiyatwa attrib Exacerbating, killing.
touye V tiye
touyelanp, touye lanp (Lamp-extinguisher) Name
given to a huge, oversize, very heavy ill-fitting
coat.
towtow adv Rapidly.
tradiktè a n Translator.
tradui vt To translate.
trafik la n Traffic*. Li te fè trafik Nouyòk She
traveled back and forth to New York for business
purposes. Move trafik Machinations, underhanded
schemes.
trajè a n (Length of) journey.
trak la n Political leaflet, flyer.
traka a n Difficulty, trouble, worry, anxiety,
nuisance, bother, hardship. M’bay kò’m traka
fè’l pou ou I took the pains to do it for you.
trakase vt To pester, to bother.
trakasite a n Trouble, problem(s).
traktè a n Tractor*.
tralala a n Scandal.
tranblad V latranblad
tranble vi To tremble*, to shudder, to shake, to
quiver, to shiver. Lè volè a wè lapolis, li tranble
kon fèy bwa ak lapè When the thief saw the policeman,
he shivered like a leaf from fear.
tranbleman an n Trembling*; shaking. Tranbleman
tè Earthquake.
195 T
tranche 1
a n 1. Shoemaker’s knife. 2. Labor
pains.
tranche 2
vt To cut into slices, to slice, to cut
up.
tranchman an n Pain.
trangle vt To strangle*, choke. M’ap trangle ou si
ou nui’m I’ll choke you, if you bother me. vi To
choke. L’ap manje kann, yon pay antre nan gòj li,
li trangle He was eating sugar cane, a straw got
into his throat, he got choked.
trankil attrib Quiet, tranquil*. Kite pitit la trankil
Leave (let) the kid alone. Kite’m trankil, m’okipe
Leave me alone; I’m busy.
trankilite a n Tranquility*.
tranp, antranp adv Li mouye tranp He’s soaking
wet. Cf. alatranp.
tranpe 1
a n A beverage made by soaking several
roots in alcohol, brandy, or absinthe. Drink it,
and brother! Said to be an aphrodisiac. This is
understandable if a lot of absinthe is used together
with various aromatic plants. Anis and lemon
juice are very often used depending on the taste
and strength desired.
tranpe 2
vt To soak, to dunk, to dip. To marinate.
trans la n Trance*.
transfè a n Transfer*.
transfere vt To transfer*.
transfòme vt To transform*.
transplante vt To transplant*.
transpòte vt To transport*, to freight.
trant num Thirty.
trantyèm num Thirtieth.
tranzaksyon an n Transaction*.
trap V trape
trapde adv Fast, quickly, in a jiffy.
trape, trap vt To catch; to find.
tras la n Trace*, track(s).
trase vt To draw, trace* out, lay out. Trase cheve
To part the hair. Trase you egzanp To set an
example. Trase rout To lay out the road, to show
the way.
travay 1
la n Work, task, job, employment. Bay
travay To employ, to engage (to hire).
travay 2
vt & vi To work. Nan ki sa ou ap travay?
What’s your line (of work)? Fè tèt ou travay Use
your head. Maladi pitit li a ap travay li tròp His
child’s illness is troubling him too much. Travay
kon bourik To work like a horse. Li travay pou fyèl
li pete He works like a horse. Li travay tè He
cultivates the land.
travayan attrib Hard-working, industrious.
travayè a n Laborer, worker. Travayè yo rekòlte
tout mayi nan jaden an The workmen harvested all
the corn in the garden.
travayèz la n Female worker.
travè Chemen travè Short-cut.
travès la n 1. Crossbeam. 2. Shortcut. 3. Passage,
crossing.
travèse vt To cross, to cross over, to pass over,
pass through, travel thru, to get through; get
over (wall, etc). Kouri travèse To run through.
Cf Traverse*.
tray la n Difficulty, problem, trouble, vicissitudes.
Fi a ap pase you tray ak mari’l The woman’s
husband is causing her a lot of difficulties.
trayi vt To betray, to give up (quit).
trayizon an n Treason*.
trè 1
a n Line (with a pen); feature(s).
trè 2
adv Very; quite.
trèf 1
la n Clubs (in card game).
trèf 2
la n Clover, trefoil*.
tren an n 1. Train*. 2. Penis, cock. 3. Fè tren
To make a lot of noise. Ki moun k’ap fè tren nan
kay la? Who is making noise in the house?
treng nan n Rod, beam; triangle* (arch).
trennaye vi To loaf around, to loiter.
trennen 1
vt To haul, to pull, to tow, drag along,
to tug, help along.
trennen 2
vi To wander, to lag, to linger, to loaf
around.
trennen 3
Drawling (voice).
trepase vi To die.
très la n Braid, tress*. Penyen de très To have two
pig tails. Très fi yo konn mete sou rad yo The
braids women used to put on their clothes.
tresayi vi To thrill, curdle. San’m tresayi My
blood curdled.
trese vt To weave, plait, braid. An Ayiti yo trese
pànye ak banbou sitou In Haiti they weave baskets
mostly with bamboo.
tresi V ratresi
trèt la n Traitor*. An trèt Treacherously, by
trickery.
trete 1
vt To treat*, to care for. Se doktè Tousen ki
te trete’l It was doctor Toussaint who treated him.
trete 2
vt Trete de To call (names). Li trete Pòl de
mantè He called Paul a liar.
tretman an n Treatment*. Move tretman an
Mistreatment.
T 196
treto a n Trestle*.
trèz num Thirteen. Ou a retounen sou trèz jou
You’ll come back in 13 days. Lè ou gade nan mont
ou, ou a ouè li trèz è When you look at your watch,
it will be too late.
trezò a n Treasure*; treasury*.
trèzyèm num Thirteenth.
tribilasyon an n Vexation. Tribulation*, hardship.
tribinal la n Tribunal*, court of law. M’ap pran
Bondye an temwen, si ou pa renmèt mwen kòb mwen,
m’apral nan tribinal avèk ou As God is my witness,
if you don’t give me my money back, I’m going to sue
you.
tribòbabò, tribò babò adv On all sides. Also
babòtribò.
trik la n Trick*, ruse.
triko a n Knitting.
trimen vi To toil, drudge, to work hard.
trimès la n Quarter (3 months), trimester* (school
term).
triminay la n Trouble, problem, tribulation.
triminen, tribinen vt To disturb, to bother, to
trouble.
trip la n Intestines, bowels, guts, tripe*. Gro trip
Large intestine. Ti trip Small intestine.
tripay la n 1. Tripe*. 2. Offal (waste in butchery).
tripòt attrib Nosy, gossiping, inquisitive (pej).
Fè tripòt To gossip; to slander, to talk behind one’s
back.
tripotay la, tripotaj la n Gossip, tattle tale, intrigue,
under-handed dealing. L’al fè tripotay sou mwen
He told things on me.
tripote vt To finger (pej), to touch.
tripotye a n Gossiper.
tris attrib Sad, sorrowful.
tristès la, latristès n Sorrow, sadness, gloom.
trivyal attrib Foul-mouthed, gross.
triyay la n Screening, sorting out. Fè triyay To
screen.
triye vt To select, to sort out, to pick out,
choose, separate, to screen. Triye kafe To clean
(sift) the coffee beans.
triyèz la n Sorter. Triyèz kafe Coffee sorter.
trò, tro adv Too. Trò piti Too small. Trò kuit
Overcooked.
tròk la n Barter. Cf. boukantay.
troke vt To exchange, to swap. An nou troke
Let’s swap. Troke kòn To fight (to lock horns).
tròkèt la, tòkèt, tòtchèt n Pad, cushion. (Any
old rag (or leaves) twisted to form a head cushion
to be placed on the head before carrying a heavy
load). Old French word “torquette” de tabac
(Paul Moral).
tron an n Trunk*.
tròn nan n 1. Altar (in Vodou terminology).
2. Throne*.
tronpe, tonpe vt To deceive, to mislead, to
abuse, to foul. V pete. Mwen an reta, dòmi
tronpe’m I’m late, I overslept. vpr To err, to be
mistaken.
tronpèt la n 1. Trumpet*, bugle. Met zòrèy ou an
tronpèt Listen attentively. Be alert. 2. Type of
tree with huge leaves (Cecroia peltata). Medicinal
plant. 3. Type of fish.
trons la n Section of a roughly cylindrical object.
tronse vt To cut (hack) into rough chunks.
tròp adv Too much, too many. It is usually
placed after a verb or before a noun. Ex M’manje
tròp I ate too much.
tropizi, toupizi vt To smash, break to pieces.
V kofre, kraze. Si ou ranse ak mwen, m’ap toupizi
ou If you fool around with me, I’ll smash you to
pieces.
trotinèt la n 1. Type of scooter. 2. Walker with
four wheels for children.
trotwa a n Sidewalk.
trou a, tou a n Hole, pit, gap. Trou bote a
Dimple. Trou nen an Nostril. Tou dan an Cavity.
Trou bouboun, trou bounda Anus.
troub 1
la n Confusion, disorder, trouble*.
troub 2
, toub attrib Muddy, fuzzy, blurred, murky,
blurry, turbid*. Wè troub To have blurred vision,
to see things dimly, (or) as if in a mist.
trouble, touble vt To confuse, to trouble*. Uneasy,
confused, disconcerted; muddled, turbid.
troubote a n Dimple.
trouhing nan, touhing n Dark, cavernous hole
in the ground. Cf. A bottomless hole.
trous la n 1. Kit; doctor’s kit. Trous kle Key
holder. 2. (fig) M’nan trous ou I’m after you. I’m
at your heels. Lapolis nan trous li The police are at
his heels (are going after him).
trouse, touse vt To roll up, to tuck up, turn up
(trousers).
trouso a n Trousseau*. Trouso kle Key-holder.
trouve 1
, touve vt 1. To find; to feel; to think; to
meet. Ou trouve sa? Do you think so? Ki jan ou
trouve’m? How do you like me? What do you think
of me? Ou trouve di You did say.
197 U
trouve 2
, touve (Impersonal). It happens that.
Trouve se limenm ki sove chef la It happened that
it was he who saved the boss.
tuil la, til la n Tile*.
tuipe V kuipe
tuit M’gen tuit an An expression that people
jokingly attribute to older women who prefer
not to divulge their exact age. “Tuit” is the last
part of the words for 28, 38, 48, etc. Like comedian
Jack Benny who remained 39 years old all his
later life! Jack Benny te toujou gen ‘tuit an’.
twa num Three (Before vowels twaz). Twaz an,
twazan Three years. Twa rwa Orion’s belt (constellation).
Pran nan twa rwa To be (caught) in a
jam. Nou moute bourik la a twa All three of us got
on the donkey.
twadegout, twa degout n Type of poison.
twaka, twa ka 1. Three quarters. Pantalon twaka
Pants that barely cover the knees. 2. Almost. Ou
twaka tonbe You are about to fall.
twal la, twèl la n Fabric, cloth, linen. Twal asyèt
Dish-towel. Cf. tòchon. Ou a fè twèl You’re a
damn(ed) liar. M’te wè bèl twal nan magazen an
maten an I saw beautiful linens in the shop this
morning. Twal gaz la Gauze*.
twalèt la n 1. Bathroom, toilet*, W. C. L’al nan
twalèt He went to the toilet. 2. Grooming, toilette*.
Fè twalèt To wash up.
twasèt la, twa sèt n A popular card game.
twati a n Roof. (More often = Do kay).
twaz la, twèz n Unit of measure (wood, stone).
(About 3 feet high and 6 feet long).
twaze 1
vt To eye someone from head to foot
with disdain, contempt, rivalry, etc. M’pa gen
anyen ak fi a; depi li wè’m, se pou li twaze’m I
have no quarrel with that woman, and yet everytime
she sees me, she looks down on me hatefully.
twaze 2
vt To measure wood, etc, with a ‘twaz’.
twazyèm num Third.
twazyèmman Third, in the third place, thirdly.
twèl V twal
twèt attrib Je twèt Half-open, squinting, cock-eyed.
Sp. tuerto.
twi a, tri, tiri (North) n Sow (female hog). Also
called manman kochon.
tyanpan V tchanpan
tyanse V tchanse
tyap la n Soft cap* of the military.
tyas la n Style of haircut for men.
tye V ke
tyè V kè
tyèd attrib Lukewarm.
tyedi vi To become lukewarm. Cf. E. tepid*.
tyouboum, tchouboum n 1. Mess, trouble,
predicament. Tonbe nan tyouboum To go down
the drain. Lage you moun nan tyouboum To put
s.o. in a big mess. 2. Splash! Li tonbe tyouboum
lan dlo a He splashed into the water.
tyoul la, tchoul, kyoul n Factotum, guide, one
devoted to another’s whims; pimp; servant (pej).
Sp.
tyoule V rekile
U
uisye a, isye a n Process-server, deputy ‘marshall’
in federal jurisdictions.
uit num Eight. M’achte uit liv I bought eight
books. Sometimes “uit” may become “ui” when
it multiplies the noun that follows it. Ex. Uit
fwa (or) ui fwa Eight times. Bebe a peze uit liv
(or) ui liv The baby weighed eight pounds. V tuit.
uityèm num Eighth.
V
v Contracted form of va. V’al - “va ale” (will
go). Ou v’al bonè You will go early.
va 1
(ava, a) Will, shall. Auxiliary used to form
the future tense. Si ou jwe ak kouto ou va blese If
you play with a knife, you’re going to get hurt.
V tava.
va 2
a n 1. Pick, spear. 2. Fè yon va sou To jump
on, to attack. 3. Curse. Ou gen lè gen kèk va dèyè
ou You look like you have a curse upon you.
vach la n Cow.
vaevyen, vatevyen Movement to and fro; coming
and going (of persons).
vag 1
attrib Vague*.
vag 2
vt To ignore, to give a vague answer on
purpose.
vagabon V vakabon
vakabon, vagabon attrib Vagabond*; woman chaser;
vagrant; boisterous, unruly, dishonest, shame-
less.
vakabonday la, vagabonday n 1. Vagrancy.
2. Prostitution, streetwalking.
vakans la n Vacation*.
V 198
vaksen an n Vaccination*, vaccine*. L’ap pran
vaksen demen He is going to get vaccinated tomorrow.
vaksin nan n Vaccine*. A musical instrument
made from bamboo. A bamboo trumpet; also
known as ‘bwa bourik’ (COURLANDER).
vaksinen vt To vaccinate*.
vale vt To swallow. Vès la vale ou The jacket is
much too big for you.
valè 1
a, vale a n Joker (in cards).
valè 2
a n Value*, worth, price, amount. San
valè Worthless, cheap. Ban’m valè senk dola Give
me five dollars worth.
valè 3
A great quantity, so many. Valè moun ki te
gen lan nòs la There were so many people at the
wedding that you couldn’t count them.
valeryann n Fake, faking, buckling. L’ap bay
valeryann He is walking hesitatingly with uncertain
movements. Also to stop and go on a bicycle or
a show of skill.
valiz la n Handbag, suitcase, luggage, briefcase.
valkanday la n Loitering, wandering. Cf. vak-
abonday.
valkande vi To loaf, to wander, to loiter.
valkannen vi To wander about.
valpa a n Worthless person, good-for-nothing.
vals la n Waltz*.
valse vi To waltz*. Pitit la ap fè’m valse The child
is really giving me trouble.
valtay, lavaltay n Servant, domestic; worthless
person.
valtourinen vi To wander about, to loaf.
van an n 1. Wind, air. M’gen van nan zòrèy I
have a buzz in my ears. Fèmen chemiz li pou’l pa
pran van Button his shirt so that he won’t be exposed
to the cold air. Vale van To waste time, to do
nothing, to loaf. M’pa tande van’l I have no news
of him. Pa bliye bay kaotchou a van Don’t forget to
put air in the tire. Ban’m van pou m’al Lagonav
Don’t push me. Leave me alone. Give me time. Fè
van a) To fart, to break wind (pop). b) The wind
is blowing.
vàn nan, vann nan n Valve, sluice-gate, flood-gate.
vandè a n Seller.
vandredi a n Friday. Vandredi Sen Good Friday.
vani an, vaniy la n Vanilla*. Esans vani Vanilla*
extract.
vanjans la n Vengeance*.
vanje vt To avenge*. V revanch.
vanjou, douvanjou Before daybreak.
vann vt 1. To sell. M’vann oto a I sold the car.
2. To betray. Pa vann mwen Don’t betray me. vi
To sell. Kafe pa vann Coffee doesn’t sell at all
these days. Konbyen sa a vann How much does this
cost (sell for)? Tifi a gen rad chire sou li, l’ap vann
The girl is wearing a torn dress, her slip is showing.
vannen vt To winnow. Yo vannen vòlè a anba
baton They beat (or) maltreated the robber with a
stick.
vanse 1
adv Almost. Li vanse mouri He almost
died.
vanse 2 V
avanse
vant 1
la n Belly, stomach. Gro vant Pregnant.
Yon gro vant A pot belly. Fanm nan gro vant The
woman is pregnant. Bat vant yon moun To make
s.o. talk (by asking him questions indirectly). Soti
nan vant To be born. Manje vant deboutonnen To
eat aplenty, to eat to one’s heart’s content. Vantfèmal
la Stomach ache, belly ache. Mete vant atè pou ri
To double up laughing.
vant 2
mennen an n Diarrhea. Also vant, vant
pase, brikouri. Manje gate konn bay vant mennen
Spoiled food sometimes causes diarrhea. Li gen vant
(or) vant mennen He has diarrhea.
vante 1
vt To blow; to fan. Vante dife a; dlo a
poko cho Fan the fire; the water’s not hot yet. vi
1. To blow, to be windy. Van ap vante anpil It’s
very windy. 2. To evaporate; to go flat (wine)
(this word is used when a liquid loses its bouquet
or smell). 3. To leak out (news, a story). 4. To
lose one’s appeal (a woman).
vante 2
vt To vaunt*, to praise; (Refl.) To brag,
to boast. Li vante tèt li tròp He is bragging too
much, he is boasting.
vantilatè a n Fan (engine), ventilator*.
vantouz la n Cupping glass. Poze vantouz pou
you malad To cup a patient.
vantrès la, vantrèz n Part of the leaves of a
banana tree, which is used to make straw mats.
vanyan 1
attrib Valiant*, brave, courageous, strong,
hard-working, healthy.
vanyan 2
gason n (Bot) Bitter bush. Picramnia
pentandra, Sw. PN.
vap interj Kè’m fè vap! My heart went “boom,
boom” from the excitement. Vap vap! Fast, rapidly.
Presto!
vapè a n Steam, mist, vapor*. Batiman vapè
Steam boat.
vapore 1
vt To stun, to astonish, to surprise.
vapore 2
, evapore attrib Excited, easily moved.
vare vt To pierce with a spear; to gore. Vare sou
To jump on.
varèz la n A loose-fitting robe, a hospital blouse
or robe.
199 V
varye 1
attrib 1. Raving, crazy, cuckoo; ‘tetched’
in the head; ‘off the track’. 2. Out of order.
3. Spoiled (merchandise).
varye 2
vi (Rare) To change, to vary*.
vat V adyovat
vav la n Valve*.
vavit la n Diarrhea.
vaz la n Chamber pot.
vazlin nan n Vaseline*.
ve 1
a n Vow*. Madanm nan pran (pote) ve pou’l
wè si’l ka byen. Li malad tròp The lady is wearing
dark clothes, as a consequence of a vow she had
made, to see if she can get well. She had been sick
for such a long time. Li an ve He has made a vow.
Fè yon ve To make a vow.
ve 2
vi To want (rare). Si Dye ve God willing.
V vepa. Cf. vle.
vè 1
a n Worm, maggot, parasite. Vètè Earthworm.
Vè solitè Tapeworm. Rann vè, jete vè To pass
worms.
vè 2
a n Verse*.
vè 3
a n 1. Glass (drinking, substance). 2. Eyeglass(es).
Yo pote vè (or) yo pote linèt They
wear eyeglasses.
vè 4
prep Towards, about, around. Vè minui At
about midnight.
vèb la n Verb*.
vèble a n Acne.
vèdegri a n Verdigris*.
vèdik la, vendik n Verdict*.
vèf la n Widower.
vegle vt To blind. Also vegle je.
vejete vi To vegetate*, to barely survive, to hang
on. Ban’m nouvèl ou? M’ap vejete How are you?
I barely get along.
vekse vt To offend, to vex*, to insult.
vèmin nan n 1. Worms. 2. Vermin*, bugs. 3. Said
of a person who is a pest; foul-tongued (used
also as an insult).
vèmisèl la n 1. Vermicelli*, type of thin spaghetti.
2. Spanish moss. Cf. amitye.
ven, venn, vent num Twenty. Milyon ven A very
large quantity.
vèni 1
an n Varnish*; calumny. M’bay soulye a
yon bon vèni I gave my shoes a good polish. Lage
vèni = pale mal = To speak ill of.
vèni 2
vt 1. To discredit, to talk bad about, to
speak evil of, to talk behind someone’s back. =
pale mal. M’pa konprann anyen, chèf sèvis la ap
vèni direktè a I don’t understand a thing, the
foreman talks bad about the director. 2. To varnish*.
Glazed, polished; varnished*. M’bezwen yon tab
vèni I need a varnished (polished) table. Soulye
vèni Varnished shoes (patent leather shoes).
venkann nan, ven kann nan n Sugar cane* juice
before boiling.
venn 1
nan, vèn nan n Vein*, artery.
venn 2
num Variant of “ven”, in liaison when
followed by de, twa, kat, senk, sis and sèt. Ex.
Venn de Twenty-two.
venn kat num Twenty-four.
vennkatrè 1. Twenty four hours. 2. Scorpion fish.
3. It has also been used in reference to a plant,
a spider and other venomous animals.
ventan 20 years.
venteen n Twenty-one.
ventèn nan n About twenty.
ventyèm num Twentieth.
vèp la n Vespers*.
vepa, ve pa To refuse, not to want. (Rarely
used, like ‘pepa, pe pa’). Usually the adverb
“pa” (“not”) precedes the verb, as in the common
Creole phrase “pa vle”.
vèrèt la n Smallpox. Epidemi pase, li kite anpil
moun grave vèrèt When the epidemic was over, it
left a lot of people pock-marked.
verifye vt To verify*, to try, to ascertain.
veritab 1
la, lam veritab, labveritab, lam nan, lanmveritab
n Breadfruit. Artocarpus incisa
(Thun.) L.; Artocarpus altilis (Parkinson) Fosberg;
Artocapus communis. J.R. & G. Forst.
Other names for the same tree: fòkseli, selipi.
veritab 2
attrib True, real, veritable*.
verite a, laverite n Truth. Verite toujou ofanse
The truth always hurts. “An verite” The complete
form is “An verite Bondye”. This last expression
is considered blasphemous, and, consequently,
to be avoided. To use it would imply that you
are taking God’s name in vain.
veron V je
vès la n Coat (jacket) V levit, palto.
vèse vt 1. To pour. 2. To make a payment.
M’vèse senkant dola, m’rete dwe 200 I paid 50
dollars, I still owe 200. vi To vomit (used in the
North).
vèsè a n The verse*. Verset*.
vesèl la, vèsèl n Plates and dishes; crockery.
Vessel*.
veselye a n Dresser, sideboard.
vesi a n Bladder (in a tire or a soccer ball).
vèsman an n 1. Payment, installment. 2. Vomit.
V 200
veso a n Kitchen utensil. Vessel*. Receptacle,
recipient.
vèt attrib 1. Green (color). 2. Green (not ripe).
Cf. ròròt, rèk.
vètè a n Earthworm.
veterinè a n Veterinary*.
vèti 1
a n Virtue*.
vèti 2
V avèti
vètij la n Vertigo*, dizziness.
vetivè a n Vetiver* grass, a delightfully fragrant
perennial (East Indian) grass used in perfumery,
particularly vetiver oil, Tamil vettiver. Vetiveria
zizanoides Andropogon muricatus. Vetiveria od-
orata.
vèv la n Widow.
vèvè a n A symbolic ritualistic geometric design
traced on the ground with sand, flour, etc. as an
emblem of the divinity that one wishes to invoke.
At Ibo Beach, they were traced in the concrete,
which became hardened, for the purpose of decorating
the resort.
vèvèn nan, vèvenn n Verbena*. Vervain* (plant).
vèy la n Wake. Fanmi an ap fè vèy aswè a The
family will not sleep tonight (will stay up).
veyatif attrib Vigilant*, watchful.
veye 1
a n Wake (mourning).
veye 2
vi 1. To wake, to keep vigil*; to keep
wake. 2. To be careful, to watch out, to be on
guard, to pay attention. vt 1. To guard, to take
care of, to watch over. 2. To spy on. Veye zo ou
Watch out; pay attention. Mèt kò veye kò Let the
person interested bother about it.
vezou a n Beverage made from sugar cane.
vi 1
a V lavi
vi 2
, lavi n Sight; view*. M’pèdi’l de vi depi 5
mwa I haven’t seen him these last 5 months.
vid attrib Empty.
vidanj la n Sediment, dregs; emptying.
vide vt To empty, to drain, to pour out, to spill.
vi To cave in, to fall, to collapse. Examples
and expressions: Vide sou To rush upon, to fall
upon. Atansyon! Mi an pral vide Watch out! The
wall is going to fall. Figi’l fin vide His face is all
emaciated and old. M’vide jouman sou li I insulted
him and I insulted him to no end. M’vide kòf
lestonmak mwen ba li I opened my heart to him and
told him everything. M’vide makak sou li I whipped
the hell out of him (with a stick).
vif attrib Fresh (wound), bright (color).
vigil la n Comma.
viktim nan n Victim*.
viktwa a, laviktwa n Victory*. Gen laviktwa To
overcome, to win.
vil la, lavil n Town, city. M’pral lavil I am going
downtown.
vilbreken an n Centre-bit, brace, (tool); crankshaft
(car).
vilganize vt To vulcanize* (tires).
vilgè attrib Vulgar*, coarse (gross).
vilodròm nan n House.
vilokan an n Mystical abode of the loa (Vodou
spirits). (“L’au-delà socio-cosmique” Milo
Rigaud).
vin Short form of ‘vini’, to come. Vin non, m’bezwen
pale ak ou Come (won’t you), I want to speak to
you. Ou vin bonè jodi a You came early today.
vinèg la n Vinegar*. Pran vinèg To jump rope
fast. Bay vinèg To accelerate the rhythm in jump
rope.
vini, vin vi 1. To come (arrive). 2. To reach
orgasm, ejaculate. Cf. voye, jwi. 3. To become.
4. To come about, happen. Examples and expressions:
Papa’m vin rive My father happened to
come. Pote’l vini Bring it to me. Moun vini A
newcomer. Vini wè What if; but suppose. Vini wè
li pa reyisi? What if he doesn’t succeed? Kouri vini
To come in a hurry, to come running. Lè m’aprann
ou rantre, m’kouri vin wè sa ou pote pou mwen
When I learned that you had arrived, I hurried here
to see what you brought me.
vipochasann nan n Promenading to and fro,
usually in a group, in the evening.
vire 1
n Tour. L’al fè yon ti vire He went for a
drive (walk, tour).
vire 2
vi 1. To turn, to turn around. 2. To spin.
3. To change direction. vt 1. To stir, to twist,
to wind, to fidget. 2. To fool, to deceive. Cf.
E. He will turn you around. Examples and
expressions: Fò’m vire apre sis ri? Do I have to
turn after six blocks? Vire gade To turn and look.
Vire lòlòj To drive someone crazy. Ou vire gade
You turn and look. Vire tounen, li joure madanm li
From time to time, he scolded his wife. Vire ron a)
To make a U turn. b) To walk about. Fè yon
vireron To take a stroll, to walk around a little.
Vire do To turn one’s back (on s.o.), to leave (in
anger). Mari’m fache avè’m. Li vire do’l ban
mwen My husband is angry at me; he turned his
back on me. Vire tounen a) To come and go,
to run around. b) To pester. To pull to and
fro. Samdi se jou vire tounen Saturday is the day
when you take care of one thousand chores. (syn)
Leve bese. Tèt li vire a) His head is spinning.
He’s dizzy. b) He is crazy. Fè you ti vire (or)
vireron To go for a jaunt (a walk or a drive). Vire
lang To change one’s story (to say something different
from what one said before).
viròl la n Washer, collar. V rondèl.
201 V
vironn nan, lavironn n Turn, complete turn
around something. Fè vironn (or) fè lavironn
To go around. Fè yon vironn dede To go for a
stroll, to go about.
vironnen vt To surround, to go all around, to
encircle, to circle.
vis 1
la n Screw.
vis 2
la n 1. Greed. 2. Tendency to vice, crime,
inclination to theft. 3. Vice*, crime. Lan vis
Licentious, dissolute, profligate. Tout vis tout kondisyon
Anything goes (in games).
vise vt To screw.
visye n, attrib Thievish, cheater, crook, greedy,
gluttonous, crooked, dishonest, vicious*, spoiled,
one who has a tendency to steal. Used for men
only. Lè gason visye, fanm pa respekte yo When
men are greedy, women have no respect for them.
visyèz attrib Dishonest, greedy, vicious*; one
who has a tendency to steal. Applies to women
only.
vit 1
la n Glass, (window) glass, pane.
vit 2
adv Fast, quickly, swiftly. Fè vit Hurry.
vitametènam adv Forever, eternally*, in vitam
aeternam*.
vitamin nan n Vitamin*.
vitès la n Velocity, speed, haste; rate. Chanje
vitès To change gear. Derape (pati) tout vitès To
dash off. Fè vitès Speeding.
vitman adv Quickly.
vitrin nan n Show window, display window,
shop window; glass cabinet.
vitriye a n Glazier. Papa ou pa vitriye You are not
made of glass (you are obstructing my view).
vitriyòl la n Vitriol*.
vityelo n M’vini sou de vityelo’m I walked. I came
here on foot (on the shoes I bought at Vitiello’s).
Vitiello was the owner of a big shoestore in
Port-au-Prince. His is one of c.25 Italian families
from Teora, Avellino, Italy, about 5 miles from
Materdomini, where San Gerardo Majella died
and is buried.
viv 1
la n Food, provisions (but usually refers to
vegetables only). Nou gen vyann, men nou pa gen
viv We have meats, but we don’t have vegetables.
viv 2
vi 1. To live, to inhabit. Mwenmenm ak
fanmi’m n’ap viv nan menm kay la My family and
I live together in the same house. 2. To live, to
exist. Viv chèf la! Long live the chief! Apre
aksidan an m’pa wè’l. Li pap viv ankò? After the
accident, I haven’t seen him. Isn’t he still living?
viv 3
la n Weever* (Type of fish).
vivan 1
attrib Alive, living; lively.
vivan 2
an n Human being, living soul (Also,
kretyen vivan). Ras kretyen vivan Mankind.
vivè a n Fast liver, bon vivant.
viza a n Visa*.
vizavi Opposite.
vize vt To aim (at).
vizè n Sharp-shooter; skillful at shooting marble.
vizib attrib Visible*. In the open, publicly.
vizit la n Visit*. Rann yon visit To call on, to
visit. Visit doktè A short visit. Li okipe, li gen
vizit He is busy, he has a visitor.
vizite vt To visit*, to pay a visit*. Vizite you kay
To take a look at, to examine a house.
vizitè a n Visitor*.
vizyon an n Vision*.
vizyonnen V To have a vision*, to envision*.
vle vt To want, will, wish; to lean toward. Chandèl
yo pa vle limen The candles won’t light. Yo pa vle
vini They do not want to come. Lapli vle tonbe It
looks like it’s going to rain. Sa ou vle’m fè? What
do you want me to do? Vle pa vle Willy nilly.
Whether you want it or not, like it or not. Vle di To
mean, to signify.
vlen an n Waste (of meat); the white fibrous
part of meat, particularly near the nerves. Bay
chen an tout vlen vyann nan Give the dog all the
waste off of the meat.
vlengbendeng n Band of evil doers who supposedly
roam at night casting their magical spells.
vlengenden attrib Inelegant, without substance,
nonchalant.
vlope vt To fold, to wrap, to envelop*, to embrace,
to cover, to put in a sack. (fig) To deceive, to
out-smart.
vlou a n Velvet*.
vo 1
a n Calf, veal*. Also used is ti bèf.
vo 2
vt To be worth; to equal. Konbyen l’vo?
How much is it worth?
Vodou a n 1. A cult of Haiti. 2. Rites and
beliefs of the Arada “nation”. 3. The loas and
spirits (The English word “voodoo” usually has
the meaning of black magic and is not to be
confused with Haitian Vodou).
voksal 1
n Scandal, raucus; shameful, degrading
situation. Fè voksal To use foul language.
voksal 2
attrib Huge, enormous.
vòl la n 1. Larceny, theft, robbery. Yo te fè you
gran vòl lavil la There was a big theft in the city.
2. Airplane flight. Vòl 301 Flight 301. Pran vòl
To become airborn, to take off.
V 202
volan an n 1. Steering wheel. 2. Flounce (decoration
of dresses).
volay la, bèt volay n Fowl.
vole 1
Yon vole A lot of, a great deal of, many. Yo
bay vòlè a you vole baton They gave the thief a
thrashing.
vole 2
vi 1. To fly, to fly away. 2. To leave
(depart). Vole (sou) To jump, to leap. Vole gagè
To flee from a difficult situation (to flee the coop).
M’vole nan kou’l I rushed to embrace him.
vòlè 1
a, vòlò a n Robber, thief, burglar, crook.
vòlè 2
, vòlò vt To rob, to steal, to lift, to burglarize,
to make away with. Vòlè je gade To eye furtively.
vòlèz la n Thief. (Applied to females). Vòlèz
kon li vòlèz Thieving as she may be.
volim nan n Volume*. Monte volim nan Raise
the volume. Yon volim A lot of, many.
volkan an n Volcano*.
vòlò V vòlè
volonte a n Will, determination.
volontè attrib Obstinate, stubborn, willful, selfwilled,
insistent, one who wants his own way.
Pouki sa ou volontè konsa? Se toujou sa ou vle ki
pou fèt? Why do you always want to have your own
way? (or) Why do other people always have to do
what you want?
voltije vi To hop, to jump; to spring, to spurt,
to spatter, to flutter.
vomi 1
an, vonmi n Vomiting*.
vomi 2
, vonmi, vronmi, vromi vi & vt To vomit*,
throw up. Cf. dyakpòt.
vomisman an n Vomiting*, vomit*.
vonvon an n A large insect similar to a bumble
bee.
voras attrib Ravenous, greedy, gluttonous, voracious*.
V afre, saf, aloufa, gouman. Ou voras
tròp You’re too greedy.
voryen an n A good for nothing, worthless
person.
vòt la n Vote*.
vote vi To vote*. Al vote To go to the polls.
voulwa 1
a n Will. Bon voulwa Goodwill. M’pat
oblije fè sa pou ou: se bon voulwa’m si’m fè’l I
was not obliged to do that for you; I did it only out of
the goodness of my heart. Selon voulwa’l According
to his wish.
voulwa 2
Pou voulwa m’di’l sa, li fache Just because
I told him that, he got angry.
voum 1
(onom) A sound. Tout voum se do (In
case of necessity) anything will do.
voum 2
Also “Ale ou voum! The devil with you!”
voum 3
Yon voum A lot of, much, many. Yon voum
manje A lot of food.
voumtak 1
la n Umbrella.
voumtak 2
Yon voumtak A big (one).
voup interj Exclamation denoting suddenness.
vouzan interj Scram! Go away! Git! (Also Ale
ou vouzan! ) M’te gan kont ak li; li di’m vouzan I
had a quarrel with him; he told me to get the hell
away. Vouzan pou To hell with.
voye vt 1. To throw. 2. To send, to ship, to
refer. Cf. E. Envoy*. Voye anlè To hurl. vi To
ejaculate. Cf. vini, jwi, dechaje. Examples and
expressions: Voye chèche To send for. Yo voye
yon liv ban mwen They sent me a book. Voye pale
To inform. Mesye yo ap voye kout pikwa nan lakou
a pou fouye trou a The men are using picks to dig
the hole in the garden. Voye ale To dismiss. Ou
bezwen voye’m ale de pye devan? Do you want to
kill me? Timoun yo ap voye ròch sou pyebwa The
children are throwing stones on the trees. Voye jete
To throw away. Voye pran To fetch, to send for.
Voye pye To kick. Voye je (sou) To watch, to keep
an eye (on). Voye men (bay) To wave (at). Voye
mò (sou) To cast a (death) spell (on). Voye pwent
To make insinuations. Voye tounen To return,
send back. Yo te voye lèt la tounen ban mwen They
returned the letter to me.
vre, vrè attrib True, real, genuine; really, truly,
actual(ly). Se vre That’s true. Li se you vrè
mantè He is a real liar.
vrèman adv Really, truly.
vwa 1
a n 1. Voice*. 2. Vote (election). Eske ou
tande vwa’m? Did you hear my voice?
vwa 2
vt To see (North) V wè.
vwal la, vwèl, vrèl n 1. Veil*. 2. Sail.
vwala Once upon a time; ... and, here it is that...
Vwala, te gen you prens ki... Once upon a time,
there was a prince who...
vwalye a n Sail boat.
vwati a, vweti a n Automobile, car, vehicle.
Coach, carriage. Pou ti Jan se you sèl bagay ki
bon, se kouri vwati tout jounen For Johnnie, driving
a car all day long is the only good thing to do.
vwayaj la, voyaj n Voyage*, trip.
vwayaje vi To travel, to take a trip.
vwayajè a n Traveler.
vwayou a n A good for nothing, worthless person.
vwazen an, vwezen n Neighbor. Moun ki rete pre
ou la se vwazen ou li ye The person who lives close
to you is your neighbor.
vwazin nan n Neighbor (Applied to females).
vwazinaj la, vwazinay, vwezinay n Neighborhood;
neighbor; vicinity*.
203 W
vweti V vwati
vwezinaj V vwazinaj
vyann nan n 1. Meat, flesh. Vyann kochon Pork.
Vyann bèf Beef. Vyann mouton Mutton. Cf. E.
viands*. Mete vyann nan sou dife pou’l fin kuit,
m’pa renmen vyann mwatye kuit Cook the meat some
more, I don’t like meat that’s not well cooked. Ki
jan ou renmen vyann? Sote, byen kuit, ak san?
How do you like your meat? Medium, well-done or
rare? 2. The pulp of some fruit.
vye attrib 1. Old, aged. Vye tonton Old man. Vye
moun Plebeian, vulgar person. You vye (vyep)
timoun A very young child (in similar cases ‘vye’
doesn’t mean ‘old’. It merely stresses what follows.
Cf. E. any old thing; old chap). Vye
gason Old bachelor. You vye ti pwason A very
small fish. 2. Ugly, bad. Yon vye maryaj A bad
wedding.
vyèj la, vyèy n The Virgin*. Vyèy pete je’m May
thunder strike me.
vyelon V vyolon
vyen V vaevyen
vyenvyen, ti vyenvyen Street urchin with no schooling
and no fixed address.
vyepti Tiny, very small.
vyero a n 1. Old man, old timer, with experience
and know-how. Msye se you vyero lavil la, li kab
fè ou jwenn tou sa ou bezwen achte This man is an
old-timer in the town; he can find for you anything
you need to buy. Sp. viejo. 2. Any Haitian man
who has spent a long time abroad, particularly
as a laborer in the sugar cane plantations of
Cuba or Santo Domingo.
vyèy fi a n Spinster, old maid, unmarried.
vyeyès la, lavyeyès n Old age.
vyeyi vi To become old, to age.
vyèytimenn mwen interj My gosh! By golly!
vyolan attrib Violent*.
vyole vt To rape, to violate*. V kadejak.
vyolèt 1
la n Violet* (flower).
vyolèt 2
attrib Purple, violet*.
vyolon an, vyelon an n Violin*. Se vyolon lan
men blan He is a master of his trade, he performs
with the greatest of ease.
W
wa a, rwa a n King. Chak ane, Pòtoprens chwazi
yon gro nèg pou fè wa madigra In Port-au-Prince
every year the municipality chooses a big man to play
the part of King Carnival. Wa chat Real thief.
Pran nan twa wa To be trapped, to be damned, to be
caught, to be in a bad fix. Li se wa mantè He is the
king of liars.
wachi wacha adv Wishy* washy*, negligently,
haphazardly.
wachmann nan, watchmann n Watchman*.
wachwach Rush*, rush*. Se moun ki wachwach
He’s a person who is careless, slipshod and always
in a big hurry.
waf la n Wharf*, jetty, dock. Angle waf Broken
English.
wagon an n Car, wagon* (Railroad).
wanga a n Charm, spell, witchcraft, magic; talisman,
fetish.
wanganègès la, wanga nègès n Hummingbird.
wangatè a n A man who practices sorcery or
witchcraft. Cf. wangatèz.
wangatèz la n A woman who practices and deals
with sorcery or black magic.
wannenm vi To speak with a nasal twang. V nan-
nize.
wari a n 1. A large, inedible red bean or seed.
Grenn wari Seeds of a plant. The water that’s
used to boil these seeds is supposed to whiten
one’s skin if you drink it. 2. Also the name of a
game in which wari beans are used as playing
pieces (COURLANDER). Sometimes marbles
are used instead.
wat 1
la n In “koton wat”, cotton pad used in
health care.
wat 2
What*, what do you mean? (what is used
idiomatically after certain words or phrases to
express surprise or a request for further explanation).
Lajan de wat? What money (are you talking
about?)
watè a, watè klozèt la n Toilet, latrine, W.C.,
water* closet. L’al lan watè = li okabine He
defecated. He made a bowel movement.
wawa Blende wawa To sock it to (s.o.), to let s.o.
have it. M’ap blende wawa ou I am going to fix
you. Manje wawa To beset, to affect. Problèm k’ap
fin manje wawa pèp la The problems that are playing
havoc on the people.
way interj Ouch!
W 204
wayal la, rwayal la n Type of sandwich made
with cassava, peanut butter and water cress
(Jérémie).
wayòm nan, rwayòm nan n Kingdom.
wazif attrib Idle.
wazipay la n Worthless person.
we vt To beat up. Si sa ta rive, m’ta we ou anba
makak If that should happen, I would beat you up
to my heart’s content.
wè vt 1. To see, to look at. 2. To comprehend.
Examples and expressions: Loulou te avèg; li pat
wè kote li prale Louis was blind; he couldn’t see
where he was going. Wè pa wè, m’ap vini In any
case, I’ll be coming. An nou wè! Come on! Let’s
go! Al wè, pase wè, vin wè To visit, to call on. Se
moun ki wè lwen He is a far-seeing person. Pa vle
wè To hate, to dislike. Wè mò To see red, to be
furious, to be daring. Gaston move, li wè mò jodi a
Gaston is furious today. vi To see each other, to
meet. N’a wè demen We will see each other tomorrow.
wèl 1
interj Well*! O.K.!
wèl 2
M’nan wèl ou I am out to get you; I am after
your ass.
wès n West*. Lò ou pa la, ouvriye yo “kale wès”
When you’re not there; the workmen fluff off (don’t
work).
wete, wet vt To remove. To withdraw, to take
away, to take out, to get out. Li wete rad li He
takes off his clothes. Li wete chapo’l devan Pyè He
takes off his hat to Peter. i.e. (He recognizes Peter’s
ability, skill, etc.). Si ou wet youn, konbyen k’ap
rete If you take one away, how many will be left?
Wete kò ou Move away. San wete san mete Exactly;
without adding or subtracting; that’s the exact truth.
Wete moun nan nan kòsay ou Don’t keep on being
too intimate with that person; keep your distance.
wey Yes. Cf. wi.
wi Yes! Li di’m “wi” She said ‘Yes” (or) She
assented. In some cases, “wi” is used as an
expletive and is almost meaningless. Ex. M
vle’l wi (Yep) I want it.
wichin nan n Switch, rod, whip made from a
tiny branch.
widan In the expression “adye widan” Oh God!
What a pity!
wifout, wifou interj What! (Interjection denoting
surprise).
winen V ruinen
wipip interj Wow! The deuce! The dickens!
Boy, oh boy! Gee whiz! Exclamation of surprise
or admiration. Wipip! Gade yon bebe! Wow!
What a beautiful chick.
wiski a n Whiskey*.
wistiti a n A very ugly person. A monkey.
witi, oti Where? Witi ou? Where are you? M’pral
witi Pòl I am going to Paul’s.
wo V ro
wòb V ròb
wobinèt V robinè
wobis V robis
wòch V ròch
wòd V ròdpòte
wodaye V rodaye
wode V rode
wodonn V redonn
wòdpòte V ròdpòte
wòf attrib Rough*. (adv) Roughly*, negligently,
poorly.
wogatwa V ogatwa
wòkèt V ròkèt
wòklò V ròklò
wòl V ròl
woma V roma
woman V roman
womaren V romaren
won V ron
wondèl V rondèl
wondonmon V rondonmon
wonf V ronf
wonfle V ronfle
wonje V ronje
wonm V ronm
wonn V ronn
wonpi V ronpi
wons V rons
wont V ront
wontèz V rontèz
wonwonnen V ronronnen
wonyay V ronyay
wonyen V ronyen
wòs V ròs
wose V rose
wosiyòl V rosiyòl
wote V rote
wotè V otè
205 Y
woti V roti
wou V rou
wouch V rouch
wouchin V rouchin
wouj V rouj
woujalèv V roujalèv
wouji V rouji
wouke V rouke
woukou V roukou
woul V roul
woulawoup la n Hula hoop*.
woule V roule
woulèt V roulèt
woulib V roulib
woulo 1
V roulo
woulo 2
konpresè V roulo konpresè
woulong V roulong
wouspetay V rouspetay
wouspete V rouspete
wout V rout
woutin V routin
wouy V rouy
wouye V rouye
wouze V rouze
wowoli V roroli
wòwòt V ròròt
woy V roy
woyon V royon
woywoy V royroy
woz V roz
woze V roze
wozè V rozè
wozèt V rozèt
wozo V rozo
Y
y V yo
yanm nan n Yam*. Yanm oubyen bannann, sa ou
pito? As between yams and plantains, which do you
prefer?
yanvalou a n Type of popular Vodou dance
rhythm.
yas la n Bump on the road. Also bump with
the belly while dancing.
yatch la n Yacht*.
yay Aplenty and cheap. Cf. piyay.
yaya vi To circulate, to walk softly, silently.
ye vi To be. Jak di’m frè’l malad anpil. Ale wè ki
jan li ye James told me his brother is very sick. Go
(and) see how he is.
yè, ayè adv Yesterday. Se yè lagè fini The war
ended yesterday. Sa ou te fè yè swa? What did you
do last night? V avanyè.
yenyen 1
, nyennyen attrib Slow, peevish, whining,
spineless. Timoun yenyen Cry-baby.
yenyen 2
vi To complain, to whine, to moan, to
cry for no reason.
yès Ok, all right. Li pa fin trò yès He is a little off;
he lost some of his marbles.
Yèt n Yetta*. Henrietta. Sò Yèt Name given to the
prototype of a low class woman.
yi 1
, i He, she, it (3rd person personal pronouns
used in the North).
yi 2
interj (Exclamation used by peasants to prod
their animals) Giddiyap!
yik, nyik Bitty (tiny piece). (usu) Yon ti yik A
very tiny bit, a small quantity.
yingyang V hinghang
yo 1
, y pers pron 1. They, them. Yo vini They
came. (Before a word beginning with a vowel it
is usually contracted to ‘y’). Y’ale They went
away. Yo chak Each of them. Yo youn None of
them. (Always used with the negative marker
‘pa’). 2. One (indefinite pronoun used to translate
Fr. on, Germ. man, E. they, etc.)
yo 2
def art plur The. Zetwal yo The stars.
yo 3
poss adj Their. Non yo Their names.
yòd V tentidyòd
yomenm, yo menm Themselves. Yo vini yomenm
They themselves came.
Z 206
yon, you, on indef art A, an. Yon nonm A man.
Yon diven A wine. Yon tèl manti Such a lie.
Sometimes “yon” contracts with the preceding
word and becomes ‘on’. S’on (Si yon) If a. Se
t’on (Se te yon) It was a. Te g’on (Te gen yon)
There was a...
you V yon
youn, yonn, yon, you num One. ‘Youn’ is used
only when standing alone; when it modifies or
multiplies the word that follows ‘yon’ (you) is
used. Yon liv, de liv One book, two books. Mete
vòlè yo youn dèyè lòt Put the thieves in line, one
behind the other. Youn pa youn One by one. Youn
ou lòt Either, either one, one or the other. Youn...
lòt One... another, each other. Youn touye lòt They
killed each other. Youn youn A few (not many).
yoyo a n 1. Yoyo* (toy). 2. Penis.
yòyò Kòde yòyò To reel in pain, to bow down with
pain.
Z
zabèlbòk V zaboka
zaboka a, zabèlbok, zavoka n Avocado*, alligator
pear: Persea Americana Mill. P. “Bwa zaboka”:
Answer to “Tim, tim”. Also “Bwa chèch”.
zabriko a, abriko a n Apricot*, mamey apple.
Mammea Americana L. Pye zabriko Apricot tree.
zafè Business, affairs*. Zafè ou Hell, that’s your
worry; so much the worse for you. V afè.
zago a n Hoof, paw. (pej) Foot (human).
zagoudi a n Small animal larger than a rat that
eats chickens. Agouti*.
zagribay la n Culls; small and insignificant ones,
residue.
zak V ak
zakato a n Magnet. A Vodou charm that is
magnetic.
zalantou Surroundings. V alantou.
zalèn V alèn
zalimèt V alimèt
zam nan n Weapon, arm*. O zam! To arms.
Menm kouto se you zam li ye Even a knife is a
weapon.
zandèzan Depi zandèzan For a long time, it’s been
years since.
zandolit la n Small, climbing green lizard. Fr.
anoli. Cf. mabouya. Zandolit dòmi sou pyebwa,
li chante le swa The lizard sleeps on trees; he sings
in the evening.
zanfan an n Child. You grenn zanfan ki tout lavi
mwen A child that means everything to me (from a
song).
zangi a, angi a n Eel. Gen zangi anba ròch
There’s something going on there. (Not pejorative.
Said among friends).
zanj V anj
zanma a n Residue of a fruit after squeezing
(e.g. oranges). Fanm sa a se zanma a ki rete
Only the shadow of this woman still remains.
zanmann nan, zamann nan n Almond*. Terminalia
catappa L. Sou tout rout Kafou, depi ou kite
Pòtoprens, gen anpil pye zanmann When you leave
Port-au-Prince, the entire route to Carrefour is lined
with almond trees.
zanmi an, ami n Friend, companion, mate.
‘Ami’ is used in set phrases such as ‘mon ami’.
You zanmi gason A male friend. Bon zanmi Buddy,
chum, pal. The common word for ‘friend’ is
zanmi.
zanmitay la, zanmiray n Friendship.
zanmore V anmore
zannanna V anana
zannimo 1
a n Animal*, beast; cattle.
zannimo 2
attrib Gross, beastly, savage.
zanno a n Earring.
zanpoud la, zanpoul la n Blister.
zansèt V ansèt
zantray la n Intestines, bowels, entrails*, ‘innards’.
Ou pa gen zantray yon manman You don’t feel the
great pains that a mother goes through.
zapata, sapata vt To smash, to mistreat badly.
zarenyen V areye
zaviron an n Oar, paddle.
zavoka V zaboka
ze a n Egg. Ze trè chè kounyea paske yo fè anpil
bagay ak li, kon wè: gato, bonbon, chanpou ak
manje Eggs are very expensive these days, because,
they are used to make so many things, such as cakes,
candies, shampoos, as well as food. Jòn ze Yolk.
Blan ze Albumen (white of an egg).
zè Move zè Evil spirit(s).
zèb la n Grass. Move zèb Weeds. Koupe zèb anba
pye yon moun To pull the carpet from under s.o.’s
feet; to “badmouth” s.o.
zebichèt la, jebichèt la n A round, wicker tray
(usu) used to clean rice or beans of impurities;
(usu) shortened to “bichèt”.
zechalòt la, echalòt, chalòt, jechalòt n Scallions,
shallot*. Allium ascalonium L. P.
207 Z
zege a n Type of insect, akin to the scarabaeid
beetle.
zegrè V egrè
zegui a, egui, zegi, zegwi n Needle. Je zegui The
eye of a needle. File zegui To thread a needle.
zeklè a, eklè a n Lightning.
zekòs la, ekòs n Tree bark.
zekourèl la n Stiff neck.
zekribich la n Scorpion.
zèl la n Wing (bird, plane); fin (fish). You zèl
kat A single playing card. Zèl nen Exterior of the
nose. Zèl ou vin louvri, ou pa tande konsèy Now
that your wings are spread; now that you know your
way around, you don’t listen to advice. L’ap trennen
zèl li nan Pòtoprens He’s eking out a living in
Port-au-Prince; he is hardly surviving. Sou zèl
(or) sou lèzèl (or) soulèzèl On the side.
zèlvèt la n Worthless woman, not necessarily a
prostitute.
zen 1
an n Fishhook. Pran nan zen To get caught
in a trap.
zen 2
an n Gossip. Pa mete’m nan zen Don’t get
me into trouble with them. V tripotay. Kote je’m
fè zen an Wherever my eyes indicate.
zen 3
an n The iron (or clay) pot used in Vodou
ritual (COURLANDER). Boule zen A Vodou
ceremony.
zenbou a n Rebuff, rebuke. Bay zenbou To
rebuff.
zenga 1
, jenga attrib Speckled. Kòk zenga Rooster
with black and white specks.
zenga 2
Lwa zenga A deaf spirit (loa), one without
ears.
zenglen an n Little pieces of glass-ware and
broken bottles. They are often tied to the tails
of kites by children.
zenk la n Zinc*.
zèp la n Fè zèp To play leap-frog.
zepav la, zepab la Pound (for animals).
zepeng nan, epeng nan n Pin. Zepeng kròk Type
of pin. Krochi zepeng To twist, to bend a pin.
Zepeng cheve Hairpin. Zepeng kravat Tie pin.
Zepeng nouris Safety pin. Zepeng ti tèt Ordinary
straight pin. Pa gen kote pou pike zepeng The
place was jammed to capacity. There was no room
for one more person.
zepi a n Ear of corn.
zepina a n Type of spinach*. Amaranthus paniculatus,
L. et al.
zepis V epis
zepòl la n Shoulder. Rose zepòl To shrug one’s
shoulder.
zepolèt la n Epaulet*.
zepon an n Spur* (of roosters, rider’s metal
spur).
zeponnen, zepronnen vt To spur (a horse).
zeprèv la, eprèv n Ordeals, trials and tribulations.
zero a n Zero*, nought. Gato sa a se zero fot
This cake is excellent; it lacks nothing, it’s faultless.
zès la, jès la n The juice (liquid) that spurts out
of the peeling of oranges.
zesèl la n Armpit.
zètòk la, zetòk la n Down (soft, fine hair or tiny
feathers of birds).
zetrenn nan, zetrèn, etrèn n (New year’s) Gift.
Otherwise use “kado”.
zetriye V etriye
zetwal la, etwal, zetwèl n Star. Zetwal lanmè
Starfish. Zetwal file Falling star.
zèv la n Deed, act; charities. Bon zèv Good deed.
zeye a n 1. Eyelet, shoe-hole, belt-hole, etc.
2. Carnation. V eyè.
zèz la n Pleasure, comfort, ease*. L’ap pran zèz
li He’s making himself comfortable. He’s taking his
good time.
zezwa, ze zwa Fen kon zezwa Very elegant.
zidòl la, idòl n Idol*.
zigonnen vt To prick, to pick.
zigzag Zigzag*. Fè zigzag To zigzag*.
zikak la n 1. Coco plum tree. A type of fruit
with a berry similar to a cherry 2. Jerking back
and forth movement (bicycle). 3. Nothing (at
all). Li pa di anyen, li pa fè zikak He didn’t say a
word, he didn’t budge.
zile a, zilo a n Tiny island, Islet*.
zilo V zile
ziltik n Turks* island. Jis nan ziltik As far as
Timbuktu.
zing, zin A little (bit of), some. (syn) ti bren, ti
kras, ti gout, ti miyèt. Ban’m you zing dlo; m’pa
bezwen anpil Give me a little water; I don’t need
much. You zin pen pa ase pou li A little bit of bread
won’t satisfy him. An zing de kontraryete Moody, in
a bad mood.
zingzing vt To pester, to bother.
zip la n Zipper*.
zipe vt To zip*.
zirondèl la, irondèl n Swallow (bird).
zizani an n Bickering, discord, dissension. Ou
ap mete’m nan zizani ak moun You’ll get me in
trouble with people.
Z 208
zizi Bonbon zizi Type of sweet.
zizye a, jizye a n Gizzard*. Pete zizye To kill.
(syn) pete fyèl.
zo 1
a n Bone; fishbones. Ou se zo bouke chen
You’re absolutely shameless, you are a pain in the - .
Veye zo ou Watch out for yourself. Be careful.
Souse yon zo To have a good thing going for now.
Zo tèt, zo bwa tèt Skull. Zo tèt ou pi di pase fè
Your skull is harder than iron. Zo jenou (or) zo
jounou Knee-cap. Zo solèy Romp (of a fowl).
Fouye zo nan kalalou To be nosy as hell. To insist
on knowing what you don’t need to know.
zo 2
a n Dice. Li pèdi kòb li nan jwèt zo He lost
his money shooting dice.
zo douvan an n Type of medicinal plant. Eugenia
crenulata.
zoban Kèt zoban A collection of money to bury an
indigent person.
zobogi a n Thin, emaciated person.
zòbòp n Member of a group similar to a band
of werewolves.
zòbòy la n 1. Bunion, corn (callosity); sore,
ulcer. M’gen you zòbòy nan pye, nèg la mete pye’l
sou li I have a corn on my foot, and the man
stepped on it. 2. A blow on the head with one’s
knuckle.
zòd la n Order*; command. V lòd. Sou zòd
Under the command (of).
zòdi a n Garbage, filth. Often used as a pejorative
remark referring to persons.
zongle vt To scratch, pinch with fingernails.
zongonvi a n A lean, emaciated, worthless person.
zonyon an n 1. Onion*. Zonyon rache Onion
hash. Kale zonyon pou pare salad la Clean the
onions to prepare the salad. 2. Callus.
zonzon an n A seducer, one who thinks he is
irresistible with women, a man who tries to make
every woman he sees. “Fè zonzon” equals “Fè
jako pye vèt” To act as a gallant in order to seduce
women.
zoranj la n Orange*. Zoranj dous Orange, sweet
orange. Zoranj si Sour orange. Citrus aurantium,
L.
zoren an n Sisal-like fiber used to make ropes.
Kòd zoren.
zòrèy la n Ear. Kaka zòrèy Wax in the ears.
Zòrèy mwen ap kònen My ears are tingling. Zòrèy
sourit Sharp ears (small ears). Pitit la gen zòrèy di
The child refuses to listen; he’s hard-headed. Rale
zòrèy, redi zòrèy To reprimand. Fèy zòrèy Outer
ear.
zorye a, zòrye, zòreye n Pillow, cushion.
zosle V oslè
zosman an n The leftover bones of a cadaver;
remains. V kakas.
zòt You (Rare nowadays). Cf. Fr. vous autres.
Nou, nou menm zòt, sa pou’m fè ak nou? Nou pale
tròp (Say) you (all) there, what shall I do with you?
You all talk too much.
zòtèy la n Toe. Gro zòtèy Big toe. Kase zòtèy To
bump one’s toe.
zotobre n Big shot, authority. (usu) gro zotobre.
zòtolan V òtolan
zouti a n 1. Tool. 2. Penis.
zouzoun n Gro zouzoun Big shot. V zotobre.
zozo 1
a n Prick, cock, ‘birdie’, penis. V diyite,
pijon, zouti, bwa, pati.
zozo 2
bèf n A leather whip used on horses and
burros. (lit) ‘bull cock’ (COURLANDER).
zozo 3
lanmè n Sea slug. Also found in the
coral reefs of Port-au-Prince bay.
zuit 1
Yon ti zuit A tiny bit, a tiny...
zuit 2
la, zwit n Oyster.
zwa a n Goose. Cf. zezwa.
zwazo a, zwezo n Bird. Zwazo palmis Common
birds living in palm trees.
zwezo V zwazo
zwit V zuit
zye V je
Basic
English – Haitian Creole
Appendix
Note to Users
In Creole spelling, W and R are interchangeable in
some cases. Therefore, some words written with a W in
this appendix may have been written with a R in the
Creole-English section - and vice versa.
1 English Appendix
A
a yon, youn, you, oun, on
a few de twa (2 -3), kèk
a little tikras, enpe, yon jan
a long time lontan
a long time ago lontan, dikdantan
a lot, many yon pakèt, anpil, yon kantite
a short time ago, just now talè a
abdominal cramps kolik
able kapab, kab, ka, sa
aboard abò
abortion avòtman
about, approximately apeprè, konsa (following
number), anviwon
about, on sou
above anlè
abroad laba, aletranje
absent absan
abuse (n.) abi; jouman
accept aksepte
accident aksidan
accompany akonpaye
accomplish akonpli, fè, reyalize
according to selon, dapre
account kont
accounting (accountant) kontabilite, (kontab)
accuse akize
accustom abitye
acid asid
across anfas
act (n.) zak, ak
act (vb.) aji
activity aktivite
add to mete sou
address (vb.) adrese
adjective adjektif
administer (manage) administre
admit, recognize admèt, rekonèt
adopt adopte
adult granmoun
advance avanse
advancement, promotion pwomosyon
advantageous, profitable pwofitab
advice konsèy
afraid pè
after apre
afternoon apremidi
again, also, in addition ankò
against kont
age laj
ago (long ago: lontan)
agree, be in agreement dakò
agreement akò
agriculture agrikilti
agronomist agwonòm
ahead devan
AIDS sida
aim (vb.) vize
air lè
air pump ponpaè
airplane avyon
airport ayewopò, avyasyon
alive vivan
all tout
allright oke, dakò, òlrayt
all the same kanmenm
all together alawonnbadè, tout ansanm
allow, permit pèmèt
almost prèske
alone sèl, pou kont
already deja, gentan
although malgre
also, too tou
always toujou
ambush gètapan, anbiskad
American Ameriken, Meriken
among pami, nan pami
amount kantite, valè
an yon, youn, you, oun, on
English Appendix 2
anarchy anachi
and ak, avek. Li ak mwen: He and I
and e, epi, enpi
and yet epoutan
and, both ... and e ... e, ni ... ni
anesthetic anestezi
angry, anger kolè
animal zannimo, bèt
anniversary anivèsè, fèt
annoy, upset nui, anmède, anbete
answer (vb.) reponn
anti-aircraft gun kanon antiaeryen
any, whatever nenpòt, nenpòt ki; okenn
anyone nenpòt
anyway antouka; kanmenm
apartment apatman
apology padon
appetite apeti
apply aplike
appointment, rendezvous randevou
approach (vb.) abòde, aproche, proche
April avril
archbishop achevèk
area, zone zòn
argue diskite
arm (of body) bwa, bra
arm (vb.) ame
arm in arm bradsi bradsou, bradsou bradsa
armored car oto blende
army lame
arrest (n.) arestasyon
arrest (vb.) arete
arrest, tie up; tie, attach mare
arrive, disembark debake
arrive; happen; manage (to do sth.), succeed in
(doing something) rive
artichoke aticho
article atik
artillery atiyri
artist atis
as, (since) kon, kou, tankou, kouwè, (piske)
as for, on the part of kanta
as if kòmsi
as is fitting, in the right way kòmsadwatèt, kòmilfo
as it should, properly kòm sa dwa
as long as toutotan
as quickly as possible prese prese, vit vit
as usual kòm dabitid
asassinate ansasinen
ask (for), beg mande
ask a question poze oun kesyon
assassin asasen, ansasen
assassination asasinay
assassination ansasinay
assembly asanble
assistant adjwen, oksilyè
association asosyasyon
asylum azil
at a slow pace o ralanti
at all ditou
at first dabò
at home, (in the house of) lakay, (kay)
at least pou pi piti
at the same time an menm tan
at, to a
attaché atache
attack atak
attention atansyon
attitude atitid
attorney avoka
August out, daou
authority otorite
auto (car) oto, vwati, (‘lemon’; bogota)
automatic otomatik
average (n.) mwayèn
avoid evite
aware okouran, konsyan
awareness konesans, konsyans
awful terib, malouk
axe rach
3 English Appendix
B
baby tibebe
baccalaureate bakaloreya
back (n.) do
back aryè
(go) back retounen
(move) back rekile
bad move
bad faith, insincerity movèz fwa
bad luck, misfortune devenn, giyon
bag sak; valiz, makout
balance sheet, score bilan
ball boul
ballot bilten
balsam apple asosi, asorosi
bandit bandi
baptize batize
bar / saloon bar, kafe
barbed wire filfè
baron bawon
barracks kazèn
bath ben; beny
bathroom saldeben, watè, komòd, twalèt
battle (n.); fight (vb.) batay
battlefield chand batay
bay, gulf bè, labè
be ye, se
be able, can kapab, kap, ka
be afraid, fear pè
be deceived, taken in wè nan boutèy nwa
be going prale, pral, apral
be necessary, must fò (+ subj. + vb.)
be obliged (to do something) blije, oblije, dwe
be published, appear parèt, pibliye
be right, be correct genyen rezon
be very careful mache sou pinga-ou
beard bab, labab
beat, whip kale
(to) beat (someone) up maspinen
beauty bèlte
because paske, poutèt, pase
because of akòz de, poutèt
become vin
become devni
become aware pran konsyans
bed kabann
beer byè
before anvan, avan
before, faced with douvan, devan
beggar mandyan
begin koumanse, kòmanse
beginning (n.) kòmansman
behave like a coward fè lachte
behavior konpòtman
behind dèyè
belly vant
below (in text) pi ba
below, under, underneath anba
belt senti (woman’s), sentiwon (man’s)
benefit (n.) benefis, profi
betray trayi
between ant
bicycle bisiklèt, bekàn
big guy, powerful person gwo palto
big landowner grandon
big, important gwo
bigshot gwo zotobre, gwo chabrak, grannèg
bigwig gwo zouzoun
bilingual bileng
bishop monseyè, evèk
bit, piece mòso
bite (vb.) mòde
bite the dust, die ale bwa chat, mouri
bitter anmè
black nwa
blanket dra, kouvèti
blast eksplozyon
bleed senyen
blessing benediksyon
English Appendix 4
block (vb.) bloke
blood san
blow (n.) kou
boat bato
body; corpse kò
bomb bonm
bone zo
bood pressure, tension tansyon
book liv
bookstore libreri
border, frontier fontyè
both toude, toulede
bottle boutèy
bottom, depths fon
boulder gro ròch
bower tonèl
boy, young man, fellow tigason, bway; gason
braceros (Sp.) (sugarcane cutters) brasewos
break (the law), violate vyole
break (vb.) kase, kraze, brize
break out, burst pete
breakdown (vehicle, machine) pàn
breakfast dejnen, manje maten
breast tete, sen
breath alèn, souf
breathe (v.) respire
bridle brid
bring, carry pote
broadcast radyodifize
broken down an pàn
brother frè
brotherly fratènèl
bud (n.) boujon
bud, blossom (vb.) boujonnen
bug pinèz
build bati, konstwi
building bilding, gro kay
bulldozer bouldòzè
bullet bal
burn (n.) brili
burn (vb.) boule
burst (n.) rafal
bury antere
bus otobis, bis
but men
butter bè
buy (vb.) achte
by misfortune pa malè
by; per pa
C
calculate kalkile
calendar kalandrye, almanak
call (vb.) rele
call to order raple alòd
call, appeal (n.) apèl
calm kal, pèzib, trankil
camera kodak
camp (n.) kan
can, be able kapab, kab, gen dwa
Canada Kanada
candle bouji
cannon kannon
canteen (for food) sèvis
capital kapital
captain kapitèn, kaptenn
card kat
care (n.) swen
Caribbean Karayib
carry, transport pote, pot
case ka
cash kach
cassock soutàn
castor oil plant, palma christi makristi, palmakristi
cat chat
cat tongue langchat
catholic katolik
cause (n.) lakòz
cave trou wòch, kavèn
cayman, alligator kayiman
5 English Appendix
celebrate selebre
cement siman
cemetery simityè
center sant
center, central santral
ceremony seremoni
certain sèten
chain chenn, chèn
chair chèz
chairman, president prezidan
chance, luck chans
change (n.) chanjman
change (vb.) chanje
charity charite , lacharite
chest lestonmak
child timoun
child (offspring) pitit
choice chwa
cholera kolera
choose chwazi
chorus kè
Christian kretyen
Christmas Nwèl
Christmas tree ab de Nwèl
church legliz
churn, beat bat
cigarette sigarèt
cite site
citizen sitwayen
civic sivik
civil servant fonksyonè, anplwaye leta
clandestine, secret anbachal, ankatimini
clarification presizyon, eklèsisman
clean [adj] pwòp, nèt
clean [v] netwaye
cleaning, clean-up netwayaj
clear (adj.) klè
clearly klèman
client kliyan
cliff falèz
climate klima
climb (up) grenpe, monte
clock, timepiece pandil
close (vb.) fèmen
coal, charcoal chabon
coast kòt
coat vès, levit, palto
cocaine kokayin
coffee kafe
coffin sèkèy
cold frèt
cold (illness) rim, grip
collaboration kolaborasyon
colleague konfrè, kolèg
colleague, workmate kolaboratè
collective work group konbit
colonel kolonèl
Columbia Kolonbi
come vini, vin
comfortable alèz, anfòm, konfòtab
command, order zòd, lòd
comment (n.) kòmantè
committee komite
common komen
commune (administrative district) lakomin,
komin
community kominote
companion konpayèl
company, business konpayi, antrepriz
compared to parapò a
compass konpa, bousòl
compatriot konpatriyòt
complain plenyen
complement (n.) (grammatical) konpleman
complicate konplike, mangonmen
compose konpoze
compromise (vb.) konpwomèt
concern (vb.), be (someone's) business gade
concern, worry (n.), preoccupation tròbol,
pwoblèm, preokipasyon
concerned (in, with) enterese
condemn kondane
English Appendix 6
condition (on condition that) kondisyon (a
kondisyon)
conference konferans
confidence konfyans
conflict (n.) konfli
congratulate felisite
connect, link konekte, relye, mete ansanm
connoisseur konesè
consciousness-raising konsyantizasyon
conservative konsèvatè
consider konsidere
constipate konstipe
constitute konstitiye
constitution konstitisyon
consul konsil
consult konsilte
contact (n.) kontak
contact (vb.) kontakte
contaminate kontamine
continue kontinye, rapousib
contraband kontrebann
convention konvansyon
cooperation kowoperasyon
coordination kowòdinasyon
copy (n.) kopi
corner kwen, rakwen
correspondent korespondan
corruption kòripsyon
count (vb.) konte
country peyi
countryside (as opposed to town) andeyò
coup d'etat koudeta
courage kouray
courageous vanyan, brav
course, class kou
court, tribunal tribinal
courthouse tribinal
cow vach
cowardliness lachte
craft, vessel batiman, bato,anbakasyon
crash [v] kraze
create kreye
Creole kreyòl
criminal kriminèl
crippled enfim, envalid, kokobe
crooked, winding krochi
cross (n.) kwa
cross (vb.) janbe, travèse
crossroads kalfou, kafou
croup kroup
crowd, crowded ankonbre
cruel kriyèl
crumb miyèt
crush, step on pile
Cuba Kiba
culture kilti
currency lajan
custom, habit mès, abitid, manyè
custom office ladwann
cut (vb.) koupe
cut to pieces, kill with machete or axe rache,
rachonnen
cut, trim (vb.) taye
D
damage (n.) dega
dance (n.) dans
dance (vb.) danse
danger danje
darkness fè nwa
darkness, evil tenèb
date, day dat
day jou
day, daytime lajounen
dead (n.) mò, moun mouri
dead mouri
dead (my late father) defen (defen papa’m)
dead-end street enpas
deal with boule ak
death lanmò
7 English Appendix
December desanm
decent, adequate anfòm, konvnab
decide deside
decision desizyon
declare deklare
declare, decree (vb.) dekrete
decorations dekorasyon, bèbèl
decrease (n.) bès, diminisyon
decree (n.) arete
deep fon
defend; prevent defann, entèdi
defense defans
deficit defisi
definite defini
definitively, totally nètalkole
deflect pare
degrade degrade, avili
degree degre
deliver renmèt, delivre
demand (n.) revandikasyon
demand (vb.) egzije, reklame
democracy demokrasi
democrat demokrat
democratic demokratik
denotes action involving following noun kout
denounce, inform on denonse
dentist dantis
deny demanti
department (geographical division) depatman
deport depòte
deportation depòtasyon
depot depo; deposit
derail deraye
deserve merite
desk biwo
despise meprize
destroy (with rage) detwi, depatya, kaba
destructive destriktè, kraze brize
detail detay
determination detèminasyon
determiner (grammatical) detèminan
develop devlope
devoid of denye, prive (de)
devote konsakre
devoted devwe
diagnosis dyagnostik
dialogue dyalog
diarrhea dyare, vant mennen, vant pase
dictate dikte
dictator diktatè
dictatorship diktati
die mouri, fè vwèl pou peyi san chapo
difference diferans
different diferan
different,various divès, plizyè
difficulty difikilte
dig fouye
diminished diminye
dinner dine
diphtheria difteri
diploma diplòm
direct dirèk
direction; leadership, direksyon
directly dirèkteman
director direktè
dirty sal
disagree pa dakò
disappear disparèt
disarm dezame
discipline (vb.) disipline
discuss diskite
disease, illness maladi
disobey dezobeyi
display, show off etale, layite
distribution distribisyon
dive plonje
divide, separate divize, separe
dizzy gen vètij
do, make fè
do again, (done again) refè, (refèt)
doctor doktè
dog chen
English Appendix 8
dollar dola
Dominican Republic Lan Panyòl, Sen Domeng,
Repiblik Dominikèn
Dominican, of the Dominican Republic
dominiken
don't, do not pa, piga, pinga
door pòt
dose dòz
down with aba
downtown (n. and loc.) lavil
draw up drese
draw, attract atire
drift (vb.) drive, drivaye
drifter drivayè
drink (vb.) bwè
drive around, stroll around vire, vire ron
driver chofè
drop (n.) gout, degout
drop (v.) lage
drown neye
drug dwòg
drunk sou, gri
dry chèch, sèch
dry (v.) seche
dugout (boat) bwa fouye
dull (adj.) (not sharp) defile; (boring) raz
dusk labrin, labrenn
dust pousyè
Dutch olandè
duty devwa
dynamite dinamit
E
ear zòrèy
early bonè
earn touche
east lès
easy fasil
eat manje
economic ekonomik
ecumenical ekimenik
education edikasyon
effect efè
effort jefò, efò
egg ze
eggplant berejenn
eight uit
eighteen dizuit
eighty katreven
either ... or ... swa ... swa ..., oubyen ... oubyen
elect (vb.) eli
election eleksyon
electric, electrical elektrik
electrical generator delko
electricity elektrik, elektrisite
elementary (school) primè
eleven onz
eliminate elimine
embark, go aboard anbake
embarrass anbarase, jennen
embassy anbasad
employee anplwaye
end (n.) fen, finisman
end (vb.) kaba
enemy lennmi, lenmi
engineer enjenyè
English angle
enjoy jwi
environment anviwonman, milye
episcopal episkopal
equal egal
equally egalman
erect (vb.) mete kanpe
erosion ewozyon
especially espesyalman, sitou
establish etabli, tabli
estimate (vb.) estime
et cetera, etc. etsetera, e latriye
Europe Ewòp
evaluate evalwe
9 English Appendix
even (adv.) menm
even if menmsi
evening sware
evening swa
evening (attr.), in the evening diswa
event evenman
every single + n., all the mezi + n.
every, each chak
everyone tout moun
everywhere tout kote, toupatou , tribòbabò
evidence, proof temwayaj
exactly egzakteman, ekzakteman
exactly the same menmman parèyman
examination egzamen
example ekzanp
example egzanp
except sòf
execute egzekite
executive ekzekitif
exist egziste, ekziste
existence egzistans
exodus ekzòd
expect, wait for tann
expensive chè
exploit eksplwate
exploitation eksplwatasyon
exploiter eksplwatè, esplwatè
expose the truth mete ... deyò
extradition ekstradisyon
eye je, zye
F
fabric, material tisi
face figi
face, brave brave
facility, apparatus aparèy
factory faktori
faculty (university) fakilte
faith fwa
fall (vb.) tonbe
fall through, fail ale atè
false fo, malatchong
family fanmi, lafanmi
family name, surname non, siyati
fancy, elegant bwòdè, elegan
farm (n.) fèm
farmer; peasant kiltivatè, abitan
fast (adj.) rapid
fast (adv.) vit
fat (adj.) gra
fat (n.) grès
father papa
favor favè
fear (n.) laperèz, kè sote
fed up, tired bouke
feet pye
female femèl, manman
fence (n.) kloti, lantouray
fever lafyèv
field chan, teren
fifteen kenz
fifty senkant
fifty seven senkantsèt
fight, struggle (n.) lit, batay
fight, struggle (vb.) goumen, lite
film fim
find (vb.) jwenn, rankontre, twouve
find, ascertain konstate
finger dwèt
fingerprint anprent
fir tree sapen
fire dife
fire, dismiss revoke
firefly koukouy
firm (adj.) fèm
first premye
first-rate totalkapital
firstly premyèman
fish (n.) pwason
five senk
English Appendix 10
flag drapo
flame (n.) flanm
flashlight flach
flat (adj.) plat
flesh chè
flesh, meat vyann
flood (n.) inondasyon
flow koule
fly (n.) mouch
fog bwouya
follow swiv
follow pouswiv
food manje, lamanjay
foot pye
for pou
for (period of time in past), since, from (in time
expressions) depi
for any reason at all pou ti krik ti krak
for example pa ekzanp
for nothing, in vain pou granmèsi
for, in that case donk
force, strength fòs
foreign etranje
foreign, exterior eksteryè
foresee prevwa
forest (woods) forè, bwa
forget bliye
form (n.) fòm
form (vb.) fòme
former ansyen
fort, fortress fò, fòtrès
forty karant
foundation fondman, fondasyon
founder fondatè
four kat
four o'clock katrè
fourteen katòz
fourth katryèm
fourthly katryèmman
France Frans
fraternity fratènite
free, at liberty lib
free, no charge gratis
freedom libète
freighter (ship) bato, batiman
French franse
French Guiana Giyàn
freshness frechè, lafrechè
friend zanmi
from time to time detanzantan
from X to X sòti X (pou) rive X
from, in de
from, since depi, denpi
full, busy chaje
function (vb.) fonksyone
fund fon
funeral antèman, lantèman
funny komik, rizib
furniture mèb
furthest, extreme ekstrèm
future avni
G
gallon galon
gallop, run around galope
game (animal) jibye
game (amusement) jwèt
garage garaj
garden, field jaden
gargle gagari
garlic weed ave
gas station ponp gazolin, stasyon gazolin
gate baryè, pòtay
gather rasanble
gather ranmase
gauge gedj
general jeneral, polivalan
general headquarters gran katye jeneral
generally jeneralman
Geneva Jenèv
11 English Appendix
germ jèm
get bigger vin pi gwo
get deeper apwofondi
get down, go down; stay (overnight) desann
give bay, ban, ba
give a gift fè kado
give back remèt
give up, let go, let out, release; leave, go away
lage
given (that) etan done, kòm
glance at voye je sou
glove(s) gan
go ale
go in, enter antre, rantre
go out, come out, leave sòti
go up, get in (vehicle) monte
go with, (they match) mache ak (youn ale ak
lòt)
God Bondye
goddaughter fiyòl, fiyèl
godfather parenn
godmother marenn, nennenn
godson fiyòl, fiyèl
good bon
good (at doing sth.) fò
good (n.), wellbeing byen
goodness! (interj.) mezanmi!
gospel levanjil
gourd kalbas
gourde (Haitian currency) goud
government gouvènman
grace lagras
grain grenn (grain of sand: grenn sab)
grammar gramè
grandfather granpapa, granpè
grandmother grann
grant (vb.) akòde
grass zèb
grave / tomb fòs, tonm
greedy visye, ava
green vèt
green bean (lit. 'tender bean') pwatann
grocery store boutik, episri
group gwoup, gwoupman
group bann
group (of musicians) minidyaz
grow (person) grandi
grow (plant) pouse; plante
Guadaloupe Lagwadloup
guarantee (n.) garanti
guard (n.) gad
guilty koupab
gun (rifle) fizi (pistol) revòlvè
guy nonm, nèg
H
hair (on head) cheve
hair (on body) pwal
Haiti Ayiti
Haitian ayisyen
Haitian (fem.) ayisyèn
half demi
half mast, half staff demi ma
hammer mato
hand (help) koutmen
hand (n.) men
hand grenade grenad
handful ponyen
hang down pandye
happen pase, fèt, dewoule
happy, pleased kontan
hard (not soft) di
harvest rekòt
hat chapo
hate (vb.) rayi
have genyen, gen, ganyen, gan
have + vb. (perfective) fin
have just sòt
have just fin
have to oblije
English Appendix 12
have to + vb. sètoblije + vb.
(to) have to do with genyen ... a revwa ak
he li
head tèt
head office syèj
head, leader chèf, alatèt, antèt
headache tèt fè mal, maltèt
headlight grantlimyè
headquarters katye jeneral
health sante
healthy an sante, gaya
hear tande
heart kè
heavy lou
heel talon
helicopter elikoptè
hell lanfè
helmet kas
help! (as exclamation) anmwe!
help (vb.) ride, ede
help, aid (n.) sekou
her li, l
here isi, isit, pa bò isit
here is men
hide (vb.) kache
high heels (of shoes) talon kikit
higher siperyè, pi ro
highway gran rout, rout
hill, mountain mòn
him li, l
historic istorik
hit (v.) frape, bay kou
hold out, stretch out lonje
Holland Peyi Ba, La Holand
holy sen; sakre
home lakay, kay
honest onèt
honor onè, lonè
hook kochèt (door), zen (fish hook)
hope (n.) espwa
hope (v.) espere
horrible, ugly vye
hospital lopital
hot (of temperature) cho
hot, spicy (of food) pike
hot; in a hurry, worked up (person) cho
hotel otèl
hour lè, è
house (n.) kay
House of Representatives lachanm
housing development; in Haiti, often slum areas
site
how ki jan
how much, how many konbyen
how; what (asking for repetition) kòman
however sepandan
human rights dwa moun
hundred san
hunger, hungry grangou
hunt (n.) lachas
hunt (v.) chase
hurricane siklòn
hurry, hasten fè vit, prese
husband mari, mouche
hymn, anthem ochan
hyphen tirè
I
I m, mwen
ice glas
idea lide
identification idantifikasyon
idiot idyo, bèkèkè
if si
illegal ilegal
immature wòwòt
imperialist enperyalis
importance enpòtans
improve amelyore
in nan, lan; andidan
13 English Appendix
in (followed by language name) an
in a hurry prese
in a jiffy nan 2 tan 3 mouvman
in a tight spot antrave
in addition to anplis de
in common, public an komen
in order an règ
in ruins an ranyon
in spite of malgre
in the air anlè
in the course of, during pandan, okou
in the morning (after time of day) dimaten
in the name of onon
in tiny pieces an miyèt moso
in trouble nan ka
in, to nan
inaugurate inogire
inch(es) pous
including, up to (vb. used with prep. function)
rive
incompetence enkonpetans
incompetent, incapable enkapab
increase, augment ogmante
indeed, in fact an efè
industrial; industrialist endistriyèl
infantry enfantry
infected enfekte
influence (n.) enfliyans
information enfòmasyon, ransèyman
injection piki
injured in an accident aksidante
injustice lenjistis
innocent inosan
inquiry ankèt
inside anndan
inspiration enspirasyon
instead of olye
institute (n.) enstiti
institution enstitisyon
interest (n.) enterè
interior enteryè
international entènasyonal
intervene, intercede entèvni
investigation rechèch
invite envite
iodine
irrigate irige, fè irigasyon
island il, lil
issue (vb.) lanse
it is necessary fòk
J
jack (playing cards) valè, djak
jack (tool) djak
jack (v.) djake
jacket vès, palto
January janvye
Jesus Jezi
jet djèt
jitney bus taptap
job djob
join together, stick together pote kole
join, put together mete ak, mete ansanm
journalist, journalism jounalis
joy lajwa
judge (vb.) jije
judiciary jidisyè
juice ji
jump (vb.) sote
jump, hitch a ride fè eksprès
juncture konjonkti
just (+ vb.) annik
just, fair; just, merely jis
justice jistis, lajistis
K
keep, conserve konsève, kenbe
kick (n.) kout pye
English Appendix 14
kick (v.) bay kout pye
kidnap kidnape
kill tiye, touye
kilometer kilomèt
kind (adj.) janti
kind, variety varyete, kalite, jan
knife (generic) kouto
knock (vb.) frape
knot (on rope) ne
know konnen, konn
knowledgeable, scientific, scholarly save
L
lack of discipline endisiplin
lack of security ensekirite
lamb (baby sheep) ti mouton
lamp lanp
land (n.) tè
landslide eboulman
language lang
last (adj.) dènye
late ta; anreta
Latin America Amerik Latin
latitude latitid
law lwa, lalwa
lawyer avoka
lead (position) devan
lead (vb.) kondwi
lead, direct dirije
leader lidè, dirijan
leaf fèy
league lig
learn aprann
leather kui, po
leave kite, lese
leave, depart pati, derape
leave, go out, come out sot
left gòch; agòch
legal legal
legislative lejislatif
less pi piti, mwens
let's (+ vb.) annou
let, allow kite
letter lèt
level nivo
liberation liberasyon
liberty libète, lalibète
lie (down) kouche
lie (n.) manti
lie, tell untruths fè manti
lieutenant lyetnan
light (n.) limyè
light (vb.) limen
light up, clear klere
lightning zeklè
like (prep.) kou, kon, kouwè
like (vb.) renmen
lip(s) po bouch
listen koute
literacy alfabetizasyon
little ti, piti
little street riyèl
little, a bit ti kras
live (vb.) viv
live, inhabit demere
living, livelihood, life lavi
load (n.) chay, chajman
load (v.) chaje
locate lokalize
lodge (vb.), lodging (n.) loje
lodging lojman
long long
(for a ) long (time) lontan
longitude lonjitid
look at gade
lose pèdi
loud fò
love (n.) lanmou
low ba
lower (vb.) bese
15 English Appendix
Luke Lik
lunch dejene
M
machete manchèt
machine-gun mitrayèz, mitrayèt
madden, enrage anraje
made fèt
maggot, worm vè
mail (n.) lèt
mail (v.) poste
mainly, mostly prensipalman
majority pi fò
majority majorite
make a pronouncement pwononse
make big money mare gwo mago
make contact pran kontak
make easy, facilitate fasilite
make fun of someone pase youn moun nan
betiz
make success of, be successful reyisi
makeshift bridle, muzzle baboukèt
malaria palidis, malarya
man gason, nonm
man; Mr msye
manage administre
manage (to do something), succeed (in doing
something) resi, arive
manipulate manipile
many anpil, yon makòn, yon digdal, yon dal,
yon bann
March mas
march, walk (n.) mach
mark, signature siyati, paraf
market mache
marriage maryaj
marriage of convenience maryaj enterè
martyrdom, martyr mati
mass (quantity) mas
massacre (n.) masak
mast ma
Master (title for lawyer) mèt
material materyèl
matter, affair zafè
matter, business afè
matter, subject matyè
mattress matla
maturity matirite
may mèt
May (month) me
mayor majistra, majistra kominal
me m, mwen
meal (of food) repa, manje
mean (vb.) vle di
means (n.) mwayen
meanwhile antretan, pandanstan
measles saranpyon
measure mezi
mechanic mekanisyen
media, press laprès
medical medikal
medicine medikaman, medsin
medium-sized mwayenn
meet reyini
meet kontre
meeting reyinyon
member manm
memory memwa
memory (of event) souvni
men, Messrs. mesye (pl.)
mercenary mèsenè
merchant, shopkeeper komèsan
mesquite bayawonn
mess, disorder gagòt
message mesaj
method metòd
Mexican meksiken
Mexico Meksik
microphone mikro
midst, middle mitan
military; soldier militè
English Appendix 16
militate milite
mine pa'm, pa'm nan, pa’m yo
mine (explosive) min
minibus (covered pickup or van), jitney bus taptap
minister minis
ministry ministè
minute minit
misfortune malè
miss (target) rate, manke
mission misyon
mistake (n.) fot, erè
mistreat maltrete
mix (vb.) melanje
mobilize mobilize
moment moman
Monday lendi
money (small amount, earned with difficulty)
tchotcho
money, wages lajan
month mwa
moon lalin
moral moral
more (= adj.), adj. + -er pi (+ adj.)
more severely, stubbornly pou pi rèd
more than plis pase, plis ke
more, in addition an plis
morning matine
mortar (for grinding) pilon
mortar (type of cannon) mòtye
mortar (building material) mòtye
mosquito moustik, marengwen
most often leplisouvan
mother manman
motorcycle motosiklèt
mountain mòn, montany
mourning dèy
mouth bouch, dyòl
move (vb.) deplase
move around sikile
movement mouvman
mud labou
mumps malmouton
murder (v.) ansasinen, sasinen
muscle mis
music mizik
musician mizisyen
mute bèbè
my mwen, m; mwen yo, m yo
N
nail (n.) klou
nail (v.) kloure
name non
narrow etwat, jis
nation nasyon
national nasyonal
native natif natal
natural natirèl
nature lanati
navy lamarin, marin
near pre
necessary nesesè
neck kou
need, necessity nesesite
need, want (vb.) bezwen
needle egui, zegui
negative + verb marker [+anterior] pat
negative marker + verb marker [+ progressive]
pap
neighbor vwazen
neighborhood, block blòk
nephew neve
net (catch fish) filè
network rezo
never janmen
never, not ... ever janm, jamè
new nouvo
news nouvèl
newspaper jounal
17 English Appendix
next, afterwards answit
nickname non jwèt, ti non
niece nyès
night nwit, lannwit
nine nèf
ninety katreven di
ninety five katreven kenz
no non
no + n., not ... any pa ... ankenn
no longer, not ... any more pa ... ankò
noise, rumor bri
none, not ... any pa ... okenn
neither ... nor ni ... ni
nor ni
normally nòmalman
north nò
Northeast Nodès
northwest nòdwès
not (verb negation) pa
not ... at all pa ... ditou
not anybody, nobody pa ... pèsonn
not be able to make ends meet manje vach
anraje
not to be right, the way it should be pa fin
kòdyòm
not yet ponko, poko
note nòt
nothing, not ... anything anyen, aryen
notice (n.) avi
notice (vb.) remake
November novanm
now kounyeya, koulyeya, kounye a
now, but, well ò
numb angoudi
number nimewo
nurse enfimyè
O
obey obeyi
observe obsève
observer obsèvatè
occasion okazyon
of a commune kominal
of August out, daou
of course byen antandi
of Haiti Dayiti
of love damou
office biwo
officer ofisye
official ofisyèl
oil (n.) lwil
old (object) vye
old (person) gran, granmoun
old spinster kaprina
on edge (person) andemon
on foot a pye
on the ground atè
on the side of arebò
on the side of, next to sou kote
on their own pou pwòp kò pa yo
on their own pou kont yo
on their own pou kont kò pa yo
one (numeral) en
one (pron.) yonn, younn
one and the same thing 50 kòb ak 2 gouden kole
one quarter of a gourde gouden
only (adj.) sèl
only (adv.) sèlman
open ouvri, louvri, ouvè
opening ouvèti
openly kareman
operation operasyon
opinion opinyon
or ou, oubyen
orange zoranj
orchestra òkès
order (vb.) kòmande
organise òganize
organization òganizasyon
other lòt
English Appendix 18
others zòt
others lezòt (pl. only)
otherwise ousnon, otreman
outlaw sanmanman
outside (loc. phrase) deyò a
oven fou
overthrow (vb.) ranvèse
own (adj.) pwòp
owner pwopriyetè
owner, boss patwon
P
pain, sorrow lapenn
paint (n.) penti
paint (v.) pentire, penn
palace palè
pants kanson, pantalon
paper papye
paralyze paralize
pardon, grace gras
parent paran
park pak
part pati
participate patisipe
participation patisipasyon
particularly, especially patikilyèman
party (political) pati
pass (vb.) pase
passing by, via an pasan pa
passport paspò
path chemen, ti chemen
patriot patriyòt
patrol (n.) patwouy
pay (vb.) peye
peaceful pasifik
peasant abitan, peyizan
pee, urinate pise
peep (utterance) krik
pen (for animals) pak
pen (for writing) plim
penalty penalite, pinisyon
pencil kreyon
peninsula preskil
penniless an releng, san senk
people pèp, moun, mesyedam
people (vs. élite) pèp
pepper (black pepper) pwav; (hot pepper) piman
per hour a lè
per month pa mwa
percent pou san
period, menses règ, peryòd
permanent pèmanan
person moun
person, human being kretyen vivan
personal pèsonèl
phone call kout telefòn
physical (examination) egzamen medikal
picture, photo pòtre, foto
piece moso
piece of, length of bout
pig kochon
pile (n.) pil
pilot pilòt
pink pig (as opposed to creole pig) kochon
grimèl
pistol pistolè, revòlvè
pity, shame domaj
place (n.) kote, lokalite
place, space plas
plain (flat land); rural area not far from the city
plenn
plant (n.) plant
plant (vb.) plante
play (vb.) jwe
play a role pran wòl
please silvouplè, souple, tanpri
pleasure plezi
pledge, involve angaje
plot (n.) konplo
pocket pòch
19 English Appendix
point pwen
(to) point a finger at lonje dwèt sou
poison (as chemical) pwazon
police lapolis
policeman jandam, polis
polio polyo
political politik
politics politik
polling station biwod vòt
poor pòv
poor man malere
poor woman malerèz
popular popilè
population popilasyon
port / harbor pò
portion pòsyon
pose (n.) pòz
position pozisyon
position, post pòs
possessive posesif
possibility posibilite
possible posib
postposed retresi
poverty, misery mizè, lamizè
powder, (by extension) drugs poud
power pisans, mayèt, pouvwa
practically pratikman
practice (n.) pratik
prank, absurdity betiz
prayer priyè
precaution prekosyon
precisely presizeman
pregnant ansent
prejudice (n.) prejije
premises, headquarters lokal
preparation preparatif, dispozisyon
present (time) prezan
present (vb.) (on radio and television) voye
moute
present, gift kado
president prezidan
press (n.) près
pretty, good bèl
prevent prevni
prevent anpeche
prevention prevansyon
price pri
priest, father (in church) pè
prison prizon
prisoner prizonye
private prive
problem pwoblèm
process (n.) pwosesis
procession pwosesyon
profession metye
professional pwofesyonèl
proficiency konpetans
profound, basic fondalnatal
program pwogram
program, broadcast emisyon
progress pwogrè
progressive pwogresis
project pwojè
promise (n.) pwomès
promise (vb.) pwomèt
pronoun pwonon
propose pwopoze
prosecutor komisè
prostitute bouzen, jenès
protect pwoteje
protection pwoteksyon
protest pwoteste
protestant pwotestan
prove oneself fè prèv li
proverb pwovèb
province pwovens
public piblik
publish pibliye
Puerto Rico (DOKA: Pòtoriko) Pòto Riko
pull (v.) rale
pump (n.) ponp
pump (v.) ponpe
English Appendix 20
punish pini
pupil elèv
purify netwaye, pirifye
purposely esprè
put poze
put mete
put met
put out, publish (causative) fè soti
Q
qualified konpetan
quantity kantite
quarrel, disagreement kont, lòbèy
quarter ka
question kesyon, keksyon
question marker èske
quickly vit
R
racism rasis
radar rada
radio radyo
radio station stasyon radyo
railroad chemendfè
rain (n.) lapli
raise leve
raise (vb.) moute
rape kadejak, vyòl
rat rat
ravage ravaje
read li
reading lekti
reaffirm, confirm reyafime
real, true vrè
reality reyalite
realize, make real, hold (event) reyalize
really vrèman
reason (n.)
reason, cause rezon, kòz
rebuild rekonstwi
recall raple
receive resevwa
recently, lately dènyèman
receptionist resepsyonis
recognize rekonèt
reconciliation rekonsilyasyon
record, disk plak
record, register (vb.) anrejistre
recovery relèvman
recruiting, hiring anbochay, anbochaj
rectory presbitè
red wouj
reflect reflechi
reforestation rebwazman
refuse refize
regime rejim
region rejyon
register (vb.) enskri
rehabilitation reyabilitasyon
rejoice banbile
release, let go lage
religious relijyèz
remain, stay rete, ret
remedy (n.) remèd
remember sonje
reorganize reyòganize
repair (vb.) repare
repairs reparasyon
repeat, do (X) again repete
replace ranplase
report (n.) rapò
report, article repotaj
reporter repòtè
representative (n.) reprezantan
repression represyon
reservoir rezèvwa
resign demisyone
resignation demisyon
21 English Appendix
resist reziste
respect (n.) respè
respect (vb.) respekte
responsability responsablite
responsible responsab, reskonsab
responsible (for sth.) konsène
rest repo
rest (vb.) repoze
restaurant restoran
retreat (v.) rekile, fè back, batba
return tounen
return (vb.) retounen
revenge revany
revolutionary revolisyonè
rice diri
rich rich
rifle fizi
right (n.) dwa
right away touswit
right now koulye laa, kouwèl ye la a
right of asylum dwa dazil
ringleader chèf de bann
riot dezòd, manifestasyon
risk (vb.) riske
river rivyè, larivyè
road wout
robbery vòl
role wòl
room chanm, pyès
root rasin
rope kòd
rough brital, grosye
route, circuit sikwi
rowboat kannòt
rubella, German measles laroujòl
ruin (n.) ruin
ruin (vb.) fini ak, depafini
ruin, rag ranyon
rule (n.) règ
run (vb.), spread (vb.) (of rumor) kouri
rural riral
rush down degrengole
rythm rit
S
sacrifice (v.) sakrifye
sadness tristès
sail (n.) vwèl, vwal
salt (n.) sèl
salt (v.) sale
salvation sali
sand sab
satisfy satisfè
Saturday samdi
sauce sòs
save sove
savings, fortune avwa, ekonomi
say di
say, clarify presize
scholarship, grant bous
school lekòl
science lasyans
scoundrel vakabon, move je
scratch (vb.) grate
screwdriver tounvis
search fouye
search for chèche
second (adj.) dezyèm
secondary segondè
secondly dezyèmman
secret sekrè
secretariat sekretarya
section chief, rural sheriff chèf seksyon
section, subdivision seksyon
sector sektè
secure, support (vb.) kore
security sekirite
see wè
seed (for planting) grenn, semans
seek, look for chèche
English Appendix 22
seem sanble
seem genlè
seize, grasp sezi
sell vann
seminar seminè
send voye, espedye
send a message voye yon mesaj
sense, meaning sans
sentence (n.) fraz
September septanm
sergeant sèjan
series, some seri
serious, seriously serye , grav
seriously oserye
serve sèvi
set fire mete dife
set up (vb.) mete sou pye
settle regle
seven sèt
seventeen disèt
seventy four swasant katòz
several plizyè
shadow lonbray
shall a. va. ava (marker of the future)
shallow plat, pa fon
sharp (as of blade) file
sharpen file
shave fè labab
she li, l
sheep mouton
sheet (of bed) dra
sheet (of paper) fèy
shell (n.) kokiy
ship batiman, bato
shirt chemiz
shoe soulye
shooting, shoot tire
shore rivay
short kout
should, must dwe, do, fèt pou
shoulder zepòl, epòl
shout (n.) rèl
shovel pèl
show (vb.) montre
show off taye banda
shower douch; gro lapli
sick malad
sign (n.) siy
sign (vb.) siyen
signal (vb.) siyifye
signature siyati
silence (n.) silans
simple, mere senp
sin peche
sing chante
single unit yon grenn
sister sè
sit, stay; be situated chita
situation sitirasyon
six sis
sixteen sèz
sixty swasant
size dimansyon, grosè
slave esklav
slave away trimen
slavery esklavaj, lesklavaj
sleep dòmi
slow lant, lan
small sea craft, "boat-people" boat kanntè
small town bouk
small truck (for inter-urban public transportation)
kamyonèt
small, little ti, piti
smash kraze
smell santi
smell bad, stink santi fò, santi move
smell, odor odè
smoke (n.) lafimen
smoke (v.) fimen
so alò, alòs
so that defason
so; alias; to wit kidonk
23 English Appendix
society sosyete
soldier sòlda
solid solid
solidarity solidarite
solution solisyon
solve the problem for, do something for, help
fè on jan pou
solve your problems in a jiffy ba w sa sou 2
chèz
some kèk, kèlke, de
song chante
sophisticated weapon zam fann fwa
sore throat mal gòj
soul nanm
sound (n.) son
sound (vb.) sonnen, kònen
source sous
south sid
southeast sidès
southwest sidwès
sow, scatter simaye
space espas
Spanish (language); person from Dominican
Republic panyòl
speak, talk pale
special espesyal
speech diskou
speed vitès
spelling, orthography òtograf
spend (money) depanse
spin, run around, beat toupizi
spirit lespri
spiritual espirityèl
split, crack (vb.) fann
spoil, waste (vb.) gate
spread (vb.) etann
spring (of water) sous, tèt dlo
spy espyon
stabilize estabilize
stage (theater) sèn
stage, point stad
stamina, bile fyèl
stand (still); stand up kanpe
stand; endure, stay firm; hold, support; keep;
capture kenbe
starting from apati
state (n.) leta
statement deklarasyon, kominike
station estasyon
stay, remain; still have rete, ret
steps (to achieve sth.), attempt demach
stick (n.) baton
stick (vb.) kole
stiffen redi, fè vin rèd
still (adv.) ankò, toujou
still not poko
stomach vant
stomach ache vant mòde
stop! (interj.) stòp!, rete!
stop (vb.) bouke, sispann
store magazen
storm tanpèt
story istwa
stream rivyè
street ri, lari
strike (n.) grèv
strong fò
struggle (n.) batay, lit
struggle, fight penpennen
student etidyan
stuff (vb.) boure
stupid sòt, stipid, enbesil
subject (n.) sijè
success siksè, reyisit
such as tèlke
such as, like tankou
suffer soufri
suffering (n.) soufrans, tray
suffocate toufe
sugar harvest (Dominican Republic) zafra
sugarcane kann
sugarcane workers' camp batèy
suggest sijere
English Appendix 24
sun solèy
Sunday dimanch
sunrise (at sunrise: lè solèy ap leve)
sunset (at sunset: lè solèy ap kouche)
superstitious sipèstisye
supper soupe
supply (vb.) founi
supply depot depo founiti
support, back (vb.) apiye
supposedly, that is to say kòm ki dire, kòm kwa
dire
surely siman
surname, family name non, siyati
surprise (vb.) etone, siprann
surrender rann tèt
surrounding; around, at about ozanviwon
swallow vale
swell (vb.) gonfle
swell, grow larger gwosi
swelling, inflamation anflamasyon
Switzerland Laswis
symbol senbòl
sympathizer senpatizan
synthetic, artificial sentetik
system sistèm
systematic sistematik
T
table tab
tail (generic) ke
take pran
take (on) again, start again repran
take from, take off, remove retire
take pleasure, have fun pran plezi
take revenge tire revany
take the opportunity pwofite
take the/a chance prans chans
take, lead, conduct (vb.) mennen
talk (n.) kozman
tank (gas tank) tank
tank (armored) tank
tape (n.) tep
taste (n.) gou
taste (v.) goute
tax taks
taxi taksi
teacher pwofesè
team ekip
tear to pieces dechèpiye
technician teknisyen
telephone (vb.) telefonnen
television televizyon
ten di, dis
tendency tandans
territory teritwa
terrorist tèroris
tetanus tetanòs
than (in comparative construction) pase
thank (vb.) remèsye
thanks remèsiman
thanks to granmesi, gras a
thanks, thank you mèsi
that (compl.) ke
that is (to say) sètadi
that, those (pronoun) sa
the a, an, la, lan
the latter dènye a
the orders lèzòd
the other day lòtre jou
their yo
theirs pa yo
them yo
there (loc.) la
there is/are no/none ... nanpwen
they yo, y
thing bagay
things are difficult bagay la mare
think panse
think, believe kwè
third twazyèm
25 English Appendix
third (fraction) tyè
thirdly twazyèmman
thirty trant, trann
this sa a
this, that sila a
those sa a yo
those who sa k(i)
thoughtful, aware konsekan
thousand mil
three twa
throw jete
thus, like this konsa
tie (up), tether an animal mare
tie together makònen
time lè; tan
time, occasion fwa
timetable orè
timidly timidman
tiny bit zing
title tit
to/in the south osid
today jodi a
toe zòtèy
together ansanm
toilet twalèt, komòd, watè
tomorrow demen
too (+ adj. or adv.) trò, twò (+ adj. or adv.)
too much + n. tròp, twòp + n.
tool zouti
toothless person mazora
torrent lavalas
torture, make a martyr of matirize
totally, completely nèt
tour (n.) vire
tower tour
town vil
townhall meri
track tras
trade, commerce kòmès
tradition tradisyon
traffic trafik
train (n.) tren
training fòmasyon
transportation transpò
trap (n.) pèlen
trash fatra
travel (vb.) vwayaje
travel, journey vwayaj
tray kabare
treat (n.) trete
treatment, care tretman, laswenyay
tree pye bwa
trial jijman
trip (n.) vyayaj
trouble-maker bagarè
truck kamyon
truly tout bon vre
trumpet twonpèt
truth verite , laverite
try (to do); seek chache
try (vb.) eseye
Tuesday madi
turn (into), become tounen
turn away detounen
twenty nine ventnèf
twenty one venteyen
two de
typing daktilografi
U
ugly lèd
unacceptable inakseptab
undergo, suffer sibi
undertake antreprann
unemployed person chomè
unemployment, idleness chomay, chomeko
ungrateful engra
uniform inifòm
union inyon
union (labour) sendika
English Appendix 26
unit inite
United Nations Nasyonzini
United States Etazini
university inivèsite
unload dechaje
unpaid servant (child) restavèk
until jis, jouk
until (conj.) jouskaske
up to the present jouskaprezan
up to, until jiska
uproot dechouke, derasinen
urgence ijans
us nou, n
use (vb.) itilize, sèvi, anplwaye
(to) use something sèvi ak yon bagay
usually dabitid
usually + vb., be in the habit of + vb. abitye +
vb.
V
vaccinate vaksinen
vaccination vaksinasyon
vaccine vaksen
valley vale
valuable empòtan, valab
value valè
vb. + usually, often konn + vb.
vehicle, car machin
vendor machann
veranda galri
verb vèb
vice, deputy (prefix) vis
victim viktim
victory laviktwa
village bouk
violation, breach vyolasyon
violence vyolans
violent quarrel deblozay
vodou practicing vodouyizan
vodou priest ougan
vodou spirit lwa
vomit (n.) vomi
vomit (v.) vomi, rejte, bay djapòt
vote (n.) vòt
vote (vb.) vote
W
wagon kabwèt; wagon
wait tann, espere
walk ; work, function (vb.) mache
want vle
war lagè
ward (administrative district) awondisman
warehouse depo
warm (of temperature) cho
wash (generic) lave
waste time pèdi tan
watch out! (warning) atansyon!
watchful, careful veyatif
watchful, vigilant vijilan
watchword, call (to do something) modòd
water dlo
way rout, vwa
way, manner fason, jan
we nou, n
weak fèb
wealth richès
weapon, arm zam
week semèn
week before last semèn pase an wo
weep kriye
weight, cargo chay
well (interj.) ebyen
west lwès
wet mouye
what sa’k
whatever kèlkeswa
wheel wou
27 English Appendix
when lè, lò
when kou
when (interr.) ki lè
where kote
whereas, while alòske
whether ... or else kit ... ou byen
which k, ki, ke
while antan, pannan
white (person), foreigner blan
who (rel. pro.) ki, k
whooping cough koklich
why pouki, poukisa
wild sovaj
will, desire, willingness volonte
will ava, va, a (markers of the future)
win genyen
wind van
wine diven
with ak, avèk, avè
with head down, upside down tètanba
without san
witness temwen
woman fi, fanm
woman of light complexion grimèl, milatrès
womb matris, zantray
wood bwa
word, lyrics pawòl
work (n. and vb.) travay
worker ouvriye, travayè
works zèv
world lemonn
would ta (conditional marker)
wound (n.) blesi, plè
wound, injure blese
wretched, rotten mafreze
wrist ponyèt
write ekri
writing ekriti
X
x-ray reyon x
Y
year an. Five years; Senk an
year ane, anne, lanne
yellow jòn
yes wi
yesterday yè
you (sing.) ou, w
you (pl.) nou, n
young jèn
your ou, w
yours pa nou, pa'n; pa’n yo
youth, young people jenès
Z
zero zewo
zone zòn